Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Artiﬁcial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artint

aspmc: New frontiers of algebraic answer set counting
Thomas Eiter a , Markus Hecher b , Rafael Kiesel a,∗
a
b

Institute of Computational Logic, TU Wien, Favoritenstrasse 9-11, Vienna, 1040, Austria
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 32 Vassar St., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

A R T I C L E

I N F O

Keywords:
Answer set programming
Algebraic answer set counting
Treewidth
Cycle breaking
Semirings
Probabilistic inference
Knowledge compilation

A B S T R A C T
In the last decade, there has been increasing interest in extensions of answer set programming
(ASP) that cater for quantitative information such as weights or probabilities. A wide range of
quantitative reasoning tasks for ASP and logic programming, among them probabilistic inference
and parameter learning in the neuro-symbolic setting, can be expressed as algebraic answer set
counting (AASC) tasks, i.e., weighted model counting for ASP with weights calculated over
some semiring, which makes eﬃcient solvers for AASC desirable. In this article, we present
aspmc, a new solver for AASC that pushes the limits of eﬃcient solvability. Notably, aspmc
provides improved performance compared to the state of the art in probabilistic inference by
exploiting three insights gained from thorough theoretical investigations in our work. Namely,
we consider the knowledge compilation step in the AASC pipeline, where the underlying logical
theory speciﬁed by the answer set program is converted into a tractable circuit representation,
on which AASC is feasible in polynomial time. First, we provide a detailed comparison of
diﬀerent approaches to knowledge compilation for programs, revealing that translation to
propositional formulas followed by compilation to sd-DNNF seems favorable. Second, we study
how the translation to propositional formulas should proceed to result in eﬃcient compilation.
This leads to the second and third insight, namely a novel way of breaking the positive
cyclic dependencies in a program, called T -Unfolding, and an improvement to the Clark
Completion, the procedure used to transform programs without positive cyclic dependencies into
propositional formulas. Both improvements are tailored towards eﬃcient knowledge compilation.
Our empirical evaluation reveals that while all three advancements contribute to the success of
aspmc, T -Unfolding improves performance signiﬁcantly by allowing us to handle cyclic instances
better.

1. Introduction
In the last decades but especially in recent years, there has been an increasing interest in reasoning frameworks that combine
logical and numerical aspects, in order to deal with both qualitative and quantitative uncertainty. This is of particular importance for
the integration of machine learning and knowledge representation [1–3], probabilistic planning [4], bio informatics [5,6], natural
language processing [7], etc.
The trend of tackling these problems is especially visible in the context of logic programming (LP) [8] and answer set programming (ASP) [9]. There, diﬀerent approaches for probabilistic reasoning were introduced, among them LPMLN [10], P-log [11],

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: thomas.eiter@tuwien.ac.at (T. Eiter), hecher@mit.edu (M. Hecher), rafael.kiesel@web.de (R. Kiesel).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2024.104109
Received 14 April 2023; Received in revised form 21 February 2024; Accepted 1 March 2024
Available online 6 March 2024
0004-3702/© 2024 The Author(s).
Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

ProbLog [12], PITA [13], CP-logic [14], SMProbLog [15], and many others [16–18]. Neuro-symbolic reasoning, which builds on top of
probabilistic inference for a ﬁxed distribution, is explored by NeurASP [19], SLASH [20], and DeepProbLog [1]. The idea is natural:
the semantics for a given set of weights is that of one of the previous probabilistic extensions of LP/ASP but instead of assuming
the weights to be given, we learn (to predict) them. Apart from this, also model counting [21,22], optimization [23,24], and other
quantitative extensions [25–28] enable reasoning with ASP on problems that go beyond the solution of yes/no questions.
Motivation The plethora of reasoning tasks and settings raises the need to develop a range of algorithms and implementations. This
motivates us to consider quantitative reasoning over the set of models in ASP from a general and unifying perspective. Fortunately,
while many reasoning tasks in the formalisms above are vastly diﬀerent at ﬁrst glance, it was shown that they can be approached
in a uniform manner by considering them from an algebraic point of view [29–32]. Speciﬁcally, in the Semiring Paradigm one uses
the abstract algebraic structure of a semiring  = (𝑅, ⊕, ⊗, 𝑒⊕ , 𝑒⊗ ) to capture a multitude of diﬀerent quantitative semantics by
expressions over a set 𝑅 of elements using an “addition” ⊕ and a “multiplication” ⊗ that satisfy some axiomes, such as associativity
and commutativity. For example, the probabilistic semiring  = ([0, 1], +, ⋅, 0, 1) enables probabilistic inference; the tropical semiring
max,+ = ( ∪ {−∞}, max, +, −∞, 0) corresponds to optimization by choosing the solution with the maximal weight; and Eisner’s [33]
gradient semiring allows for parameter learning. By performing algebraic answer set counting (AASC), which is to sum up the (semiring)
values associated with each answer set of a given program, we then immediately obtain a solution to the original quantitative
reasoning task at hand.
Main aim However, solving AASC eﬃciently poses a challenge. It is well-known that quantitative reasoning may be (much) harder
than qualitative reasoning, e.g., lifting in ASP problems from NP-completeness to PNP -completeness or to #P-hardness (see [34] and
references therein). This calls for the need of methods and techniques in order to advance the performance of AASC in practice,
which is the main goal of our work.
Existing work Since there already exists a wide range of implementations and diverse approaches [35,36,13,37,38,21,39,40], it
is suggestive to improve upon an existing idea. However, there is no consensus regarding which evaluation strategy is generally
favorable. Thus, it is unclear which approach to choose as the basis of our work. Speciﬁcally, in enumeration-based approaches [19,
38,37], one enumerates all the answer sets one after the other and sums up their weights one by one. While the idea is simple, it works
well for “few” (less than a billion) answer sets. However, it does not scale when there are many answer sets, even for structurally
very simple programs. In contrast, knowledge compilation-based approaches [36,40,13] are more sophisticated and produce a so called
tractable circuit representation of a given program. They represent the answer sets of a program, using knowledge compilation [41,42],
in a manner that can be vastly more succinct than an explicit representation of all the answer sets while still allowing one to perform
AASC using linearly many semiring operations in the size of the resulting circuit [30]. Apart from that, there is also the option to
perform dynamic programming [21] when the treewidth of the program is low enough. Here, treewidth is a parameter that intuitively
gives an upper-bound on how complex the structure of a program (or more generally a graph) is by measuring how “treelike” the
shape of rule dependencies is, which determines how expensive it is to decompose the problem into smaller ones in a recursive
manner.
However, there are not only diﬀerent basic approaches. For knowledge compilation, for instance, there are diﬀerent classes of
tractable circuits that one can compile to; we may compile some circuits either in a “bottom up” [43,44] or in a “top down” [45–47]
manner; and we may either compile the program directly or convert it before compilation into a propositional formula in Conjunctive
Normal Form (CNF).
Approach and methods In a ﬁrst step, we therefore investigate diﬀerent strategies in depth from a theoretical perspective using
recent results from the ﬁeld of parameterized complexity [48–52]. While these results do not give us general lower bounds for
complexity, they do give us upper bounds in terms of structural parameters, such as treewidth or pathwidth, which we can use to
derive performance guarantees for the considered strategies. Based on this analysis, we conclude that the most promising strategy is to
ﬁrst translate programs into CNFs and compile them using one of the highly advanced tools from the SAT community [46,45,53,47].
Naturally, this CNF translation should be chosen in such a manner that it leads to good performance of knowledge compilation.
From the previous theoretical analysis, we know that small CNFs of low treewidth allow for good worst case guarantees. In fact,
there is recent empirical evidence that shows that explicitly exploiting the treewidth of CNFs during knowledge compilation can lead
to signiﬁcantly improved performance [47]. Apart from the size and treewidth, we assume that it is beneﬁcial if the CNF encoding
is not very “semantically complex” such that intuitively the knowledge compiler can easily identify parts of the search space that
it may discard. This last measure is rather imprecise; nonetheless, we try to use it by drawing intuition from known rules of thumb
from CNF encodings for SAT.
The translation of answer set programs to CNFs usually proceeds in two steps. First the cyclic positive dependencies in the
program need to be taken care of in cycle breaking. Only then, in the second step, Clark’s Completion [54] is guaranteed to produce a
CNF that correctly captures the semantics of the program. For Clark’s Completion itself, we consider it rather unlikely that there is a
way to signiﬁcantly reduce the size or semantic complexity of the resulting CNF. However, previous work by Hecher [55] has shown
that we can modify the completion to limit the treewidth increase compared to the primal treewidth of the program to a low constant
factor. We improve this result to use the incidence treewidth of the program [22], which provides bounds that are better or equal.
As for cycle breaking, a wide range of approaches exists [56–59,55], and so we again need a more in-depth analysis. Some
of the approaches do not preserve answer sets in a bijective fashion [59,55] and thus have to be discarded, while we examine
2

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

encoding properties of the rest. Here, we see that the “semantic complexity” of Janhunen and Niemelä’s work [56] may due to
the use of binary counters prove to be problematic, but the asymptotic guarantees for CNF size and treewidth are far better than
those from Mantadelis and Janssens’s [58] work. Nevertheless, previous empirical results showed that the asymptotic guarantees
do not necessarily translate to better performance, which is presumably due to high constant factors hidden by the Big-O notation
and the high “semantic complexity” [36]. We thus introduce a novel strategy for cycle breaking called T -Unfolding, where we aim
to reach a middle ground between the previous approaches. That is, we obtain similarly low “semantic complexity” and constant
factors as Mantadelis and Janssens [58] but only moderately higher asymptotic size and treewidth guarantees than Janhunen and
Niemelä [56]. In order to achieve this, we resort not only to the number of atomic formulas that are involved in cyclic dependencies,
but we also provide a novel, more sensitive measure of the cyclicity of the positive dependencies. This measure, which we call the
component-boosted backdoor size,1 is related to the notion of backdoor size into acyclicity [60], which intuitively asks how many atoms
we must remove to make the (dependency) graph acyclic.
In addition to our theoretical advancements, we implemented our ﬁndings in the open source AASC solver aspmc and use it
to validate that our theoretical considerations indeed result in an increased performance in practice. To this end, we conducted a
thorough empirical evaluation on typical benchmarks from the probabilistic logic programming community, which conﬁrms previous
expectations regarding the CNF sizes and treewidths as well as the performance increase.
Main contributions

Summing up, we make in this work brieﬂy the following main contributions:

1. Our analysis of diﬀerent approaches to the knowledge compilation step in AASC highlights possible strengths and weaknesses
allowing for a more informed choice of the knowledge compilation method in the AASC pipeline and provide explanations as to
why some strategies may work better than others.
2. We introduce an improved version of Clark’s Completion [54] that can, in some cases, provide even better treewidth guarantees
than Hecher’s [55] previous modiﬁcation with minimal overhead otherwise.
3. By employing a more ﬁne-grained measure of cyclicity in answer set programs, we deﬁne T -Unfolding, a new approach for
cycle breaking that has favorable properties when it comes to knowledge compilation.
4. We provide an open source implementation of our improved and specialized algorithms for Clark’s Completion and cycle breaking
in the AASC solver aspmc. In addition, aspmc enables the use of recent advancements in knowledge compilation by integrating
state of the art implementations [47,46,45,53].
5. We report on an extensive empirical evaluation using our implementation. The results reveals that all three improvements provide
signiﬁcant performance beneﬁts:
• our modiﬁcation to Clark’s Completion outperforms previous versions in most cases;
• T -Unfolding, results in small CNF encodings with a moderate increase in the treewidth;
• the overall performance is further boosted by employing state of the art tools for knowledge compilation.
Additional contributions of the extended version Some of the results in this article were presented, in preliminary form, at the KR 2021
conference [61] and the PLP 2021 workshop [62]. The additional contributions of this work, are twofold. First, we signiﬁcantly
improved the implementation. Here, we on the one hand improved eﬃciency, by incorporating additional specialized tools, e.g., to
compute approximations of our measure of cyclicity [63] and for the knowledge compilation step [47,53]. On the other hand, we
enabled inference for the full class of probabilistic logic programs, with annotated disjunctions. Second, we incorporated an in-depth
analysis of the diﬀerent approaches to AASC. Here, we not only added a wide ranges of theoretical tractability guarantees but also
signiﬁcantly extended our practical evaluation by comparing a wide range of internal conﬁgurations and by including more solvers
and benchmarks to the general comparison to the state of the art.
Relation to AI and usage of our results Algebraic operations and counting solutions are fundamental tasks in mathematics and
computer science [64–66], with applications to areas such as mathematical combinatorics [67], learning [68,10], neuro-symbolic
reasoning [38,69], and probabilistic inference [70,15,11]. Given this strong basis, AI researchers and developers can beneﬁt from the
results of our work in diﬀerent regards. On the foundational side, researchers can acquire new insights in properties of knowledge
compilation methods. This is particularly interesting also for propositional formulas that encode properties like transitive closure,
acyclicity, or are based on cyclic derivations, e.g., reachability in a graphical network. Our work also implies how to overcome
these challenging barriers without destroying structural properties that are essential for eﬃciently employing algebraic (semiring)
operations. On the practical side, researchers can directly take advantage of our new notions and methods, in particular, the improved
Clark’s Completion, component-boosted backdoors, and the T -Unfolding for developing novel reasoning engines or advancing
existing engines. Furthermore, on the application side, developers may employ aspmc as a back-end solver or library for easy oﬀ-theshelf evaluation. Indeed, our excessive empirical evaluation underlines the strengths of aspmc, paving the way to future applications
in systems utilizing counting, quantitative reasoning, or neurosymbolic learning and reasoning.

1

Unsurprisingly, like other parameters it is NP-hard to compute in general, however we ﬁnd that approximations are both eﬃcient and precise enough to be useful.
3

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Organization The remainder of this article is organized as follows. We ﬁrst provide the necessary preliminaries in Section 2 and
then introduce AASC in Section 3. After this, we shortly go over some instantiations of AASC highlighting its broad applicability for
quantitative inference in Section 4, before directing our attention to AASC evaluation in Section 5, where we give special attention to
diﬀerent approaches for the knowledge compilation step. We ﬁnish the theoretical considerations with a study of Clark’s Completion
and cycle breakings, in Section 6 and Section 7, respectively. Based on this, we outline the practical realization in our solver aspmc,
in Section 8, which we evaluate empirically, in Section 9. Finally, we conclude and highlight possible further points of attack for
improved performance in Section 10.
2. Preliminaries
We begin by giving the background on ASP, graph representations of programs, their associated structural parameters, and the
algebraic structure of semirings.
2.1. Logic programming
A (normal) answer set program Π is a ﬁnite set of rules 𝑟 of the form

𝑎 ← 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑚 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑛 ,
where 𝑎 and all 𝑏𝑗 , 𝑐𝑘 are propositional atoms. Given such a rule 𝑟, we let

𝐻(𝑟) = 𝑎,

𝐵 + (𝑟) = {𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 },

𝐵 − (𝑟) = {𝑐1 , … , 𝑐𝑛 },

𝐵(𝑟) = {𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑛 }.

We slightly abuse notation and write

← 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑚 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑛
for

⊥ ← 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑚 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑛 , not ⊥,
where ⊥ is a propositional atom that otherwise does not occur in Π.
Furthermore, we allow choice rules {𝑎} ← 𝐵 + (𝑟), 𝐵 − (𝑟) as a shorthand for the two rules 𝑎 ← 𝐵 + (𝑟), 𝐵 − (𝑟), not 𝑛𝑎 and 𝑛𝑎 ←
+
𝐵 (𝑟), 𝐵 − (𝑟), not 𝑎, where 𝑛𝑎 is a fresh propositional atom. We denote by (Π) the set of propositional atoms that occur in Π.
An interpretation, denoted  , is a subset of (Π); it satisﬁes an atom 𝑎 ∈ (Π) (resp. not 𝑎 for 𝑎 ∈ (Π)), written  ⊧ 𝑎 (resp.
 ⊧ not 𝑎), if 𝑎 ∈  (resp. 𝑎 ∉  ). It satisﬁes Π (is a model of Π), if for each rule 𝑟 ∈ Π it holds that either  ⊧ 𝐻(𝑟) or  ̸⊧ 𝐵(𝑟),
i.e. there exists some 𝑙 ∈ 𝐵(𝑟) such that  ̸⊧ 𝑙 . Furthermore,  is an answer set of Π if it is a ⊆-minimal model of the reduct 2
Π = {𝑟 ∈ Π ∣ 𝐵 + (𝑟) ⊆ , 𝐵 − (𝑟) ∩  = ∅}, of Π with respect to  , i.e. the set of rules 𝑟 in Π where 𝐵(𝑟) is satisﬁed. We denote the set
of answer sets of a program Π by (Π).
As usual the schematic rules with variables 𝑋, 𝑌 , … are implicitly universally quantiﬁed and their semantics is given by grounding
(instantiation) with concrete values (constants).
Example 1 (Smokers). We consider the smokers program, which is a standard example from probabilistic logic programming [12].

{stress(𝑋)} ← person(𝑋)
smokes(𝑋) ← stress(𝑋)
{inf (𝑋, 𝑌 )} ← friend(𝑋, 𝑌 )
smokes(𝑌 ) ← smokes(𝑋), inf (𝑋, 𝑌 )
This encodes that for each person it is randomly determined whether they are stressed. Stressed persons smoke may inﬂuence friends,
which is again random, to also smoke. We shall abbreviate stress(.) and smokes(.) by st(.) and sm(.), respectively.
2.2. Propositional logic
We aim to translate programs into formulas of propositional logic.
We use propositional formulas in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF). A CNF  , deﬁned for a set 𝑉 of variables, is a ﬁnite conjunction
of clauses 𝐶𝑖 , where each clause consists of a ﬁnite disjunction of literals 𝑙 ∈ {𝑣, ¬𝑣} for some 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 .
We use the standard satisfaction relation and call an interpretation  ⊆ 𝑉 that satisﬁes a formula a model.

2

All our results hold for both the FLP-reduct [71] and GL-reduct [72].
4

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Fig. 1. Diﬀerent graphs associated with the running example program Π𝑠𝑚 for simplicity restricted to non-choice rules (i.e. with rules of the form {stress(𝑥)} ← etc.)

2.3. Graphs and digraphs
Especially in Section 7.4 we will consider graphs and digraphs, using the following notation. The vertex- and edge-set of a
(di)graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) is denoted by 𝑉 (𝐺) and 𝐸(𝐺), respectively. We denote the undirected edge between vertices 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) of a
graph 𝐺 by {𝑎, 𝑏}, whereas for the directed edge from 𝑎 to 𝑏 of a digraph, we use the notation (𝑎, 𝑏). For 𝑉 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺) we let 𝐺[𝑉 ]
be the (di)graph obtained by removing all vertices not in 𝑉 from 𝑉 (𝐺) (i.e. 𝑉 (𝐺[𝑉 ]) = 𝑉 (𝐺) ∩ 𝑉 ) and removing all edges which
use a vertex not in 𝑉 (i.e. 𝐸(𝐺[𝑉 ]) = 𝐸(𝑉 ) ∩ 𝑉 × 𝑉 ). Further, we deﬁne 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑉 as 𝐺[𝑉 (𝐺) ⧵ 𝑉 ]. The subgraph 𝐶 = 𝐺[𝑉 ] is strongly
connected if every vertex in 𝐶 is reachable from any other vertex in 𝐶 . We denote by SCC(𝐺) the set of strongly connected components
(SCC) of 𝐺 , which are strongly connected subgraphs 𝐺[𝑉 ], where 𝑉 is subset-maximal.
The (positive) dependency graph DEP(Π) of a program Π is the digraph 𝐺 with 𝑉 (𝐺) = (Π) and (𝑏, 𝑎) ∈ 𝐸(𝐺) if there is a rule
𝑟 ∈ Π such that 𝑎 ∈ 𝐻(𝑟) and 𝑏 ∈ 𝐵 + (𝑟). The primal graph PRIM(Π) of Π is the graph 𝐺 with 𝑉 (𝐺) = (Π) and {𝑥, 𝑦} ∈ 𝐸(𝐺) if there
is a rule 𝑟 ∈ Π such that 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ {𝐻(𝑟)} ∪ 𝐵 + (𝑟) ∪ 𝐵 − (𝑟). The incidence graph INC(Π) of Π is the graph 𝐺 with 𝑉 (𝐺) = (Π) ∪ Π and
{𝑎, 𝑟} ∈ 𝐸(𝐺) if there is a rule 𝑟 ∈ Π such that 𝑎 ∈ {𝐻(𝑟)} ∪ 𝐵 + (𝑟) ∪ 𝐵 − (𝑟).
Intuitively, all three graphs represent that the truth values of atoms (and rules in the case of the incidence graph) connected via an
edge directly depend on one another. More speciﬁcally, the dependency graph is related to whether an atom could positively occur
on a derivation of another one and the primal graph is related to whether satisfaction of one atom may directly limit the possible
truth values of another atom in models of a program. The incidence graph is similar to the primal graph but allows for a more ﬁne
grained analysis by including not only atoms but also rules.
Example 2 (cont’d). Given the input data person(𝑖) for 𝑖 = 1, … , 3 as well as friend(𝑖, 𝑗) for (𝑖, 𝑗) = (1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 1), we can ground
and reduce (by omitting facts and removing them from the bodies of rules, etc.) the smokers program to Π𝑠𝑚

{st(1)} ←

{st(2)} ←

{st(3)} ←

{inf(3, 1)} ←

{inf (1, 2)} ←

{inf (2, 3)} ←

𝑟1 = sm(1) ← st(1)

𝑟2 = sm(1) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3)

𝑟3 = sm(2) ← st(2)

𝑟4 = sm(2) ← inf(1, 2), sm(1)

𝑟5 = sm(3) ← st(3)

𝑟6 = sm(3) ← inf(2, 3), sm(2)

The dependency, primal, and incidence graph of the resulting program Π𝑠𝑚 without choice rules is given in Fig. 1a, Fig. 1b, and
Fig. 1c, respectively.
5

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

sm(1), sm(2), sm(3)

sm(1), sm(3), inf(3, 1)

sm(2), sm(3), inf(2, 3)

sm(1), sm(2), inf(1, 2)

sm(3), st(3

sm(2), st(2)

sm(1), st(1)

Fig. 2. An optimal tree decomposition of the graph in Fig. 1b. Each vertex is labeled by the vertices in the corresponding bag.

Next, we recall the deﬁnition of treewidth.
Deﬁnition 1 (Tree Decomposition, Treewidth). A tree decomposition of a graph 𝐺 is a pair (𝑇 , 𝜒), where 𝑇 is a tree and 𝜒 is a labeling
of 𝑉 (𝑇 ) by subsets of 𝑉 (𝐺) s.t.
• for all nodes 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) there is 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 (𝑇 ) s.t. 𝑣 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡);
• for every edge {𝑣1 , 𝑣2 } ∈ 𝑉 (𝐸) there exists 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 (𝑇 ) s.t. 𝑣1 , 𝑣2 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡);
• for all nodes 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) the set of nodes {𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 (𝑇 ) ∣ 𝑣 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)} forms a (connected) subtree of 𝑇 .
The width of (𝑇 , 𝜒) is max𝑡∈𝑉 ′ |𝜒(𝑡)| − 1. The treewidth of a graph is the minimal width of any of its tree decompositions.
Intuitively, treewidth is a measure of the distance of a graph from a tree. It is motivated by the fact that many computationally
hard problems are tractable on trees. Correspondingly, trees are the only graphs that have treewidth 1. Given low treewidth it is
then often possible to generalize tractability results by decomposing problems recursively into smaller subproblems using a tree
decomposition witnessing the low width.
A more restricted parameter than treewidth is pathwidth.
Deﬁnition 2 (Path Decomposition, Pathwidth). Let 𝐺 be a graph. Then, a path decomposition is a tree decomposition (𝑇 , 𝜒), where 𝑇
is a path.
The pathwidth of a graph is the minimal width of any of its path decompositions.
Pathwidth is more restricted than treewidth but has similar properties, i.e. it allows for the generalization of tractability results
on graphs that are paths. Notably, when the treewidth of an 𝑛-vertex graph 𝐺 is 𝑘, then the pathwidth of 𝐺 is in (𝑘 ⋅ log(𝑛)) [73].
Then, the primal (resp. incidence) treewidth of a program is the treewidth of its primal (resp. incidence) graph. The same applies
to pathwidth.
Example 3 (cont’d). The treewidth of the graph in Fig. 1b is 2, as its tree decomposition in Fig. 2 which has width 2 shows. A smaller
width is not possible here, since the graph contains a clique over three vertices (e.g. sm(1), sm(2), sm(3)). The treewidth of the graph
in Fig. 1c is also 2, since it is not a tree as the cycle 𝑟2 → sm(3) → 𝑟6 → sm(2) → 𝑟4 → sm(1) → 𝑟2 shows.
Apart from the logical aspects speciﬁed using the program, we also need semirings to specify the quantitative aspects.
2.4. Semirings
A semiring  = (𝑅, ⊕, ⊗, 𝑒⊕ , 𝑒⊗ ) consists of a non-empty set 𝑅 equipped with two binary operations ⊕ and ⊗, called addition
and multiplication, where
• (𝑅, ⊕) is a commutative monoid with identity element 𝑒⊕ ,
• (𝑅, ⊗) is a monoid with identity element 𝑒⊗ ,
• multiplication left and right distributes over addition, and
• 𝑒⊕ annihilates 𝑅, i.e. ∀𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 ∶ 𝑟⊗𝑒⊕ = 𝑒⊕ = 𝑒⊕ ⊗𝑟.
A semiring is commutative, if (𝑅, ⊗) is commutative, and is idempotent, if ∀𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 ∶ 𝑟⊕𝑟 = 𝑟.
In the following, we restrict ourselves to commutative semirings. Some examples of well-known semirings are
• 𝔽 = (𝔽 , +, ⋅, 0, 1), for 𝔽 ∈ {ℕ, ℤ, ℚ, ℝ} the semiring of the numbers in 𝔽 with addition and multiplication,
• max = (ℕ ∪ {−∞}, max, +, −∞, 0), the max-plus semiring,
• 𝔹 = ({0, 1}, ∨, ∧, 0, 1), the Boolean semiring,
•  = ([0, 1], +, ⋅, 0, 1), the probability semiring.
6

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

All of the aforementioned semirings are commutative.
For a more comprehensive list of semirings and applications see [30].
3. Algebraic answer set counting
We now introduce ASP with algebraic measures as a basic formalism for Algebraic Answer Set Counting (AASC). Technically,
ASP with algebraic measures extends ASP with capabilities for quantitative reasoning over the set of answer sets such that algebraic
Prolog, ProbLog, LPMLN and P-log can all be expressed.
We use a variant of weighted logics [74] restricted to propositional formulas.
Deﬁnition 3 (Weighted Logic). Let  = (𝑅, ⊕, ⊗, 𝑒⊕ , 𝑒⊗ ) be a semiring. A weighted formula 𝛼 over  is of the form

𝛼 ∶∶= 𝑘 ∣ 𝑣 ∣ ¬𝑣 ∣ 𝛼 + 𝛼 ∣ 𝛼 ∗ 𝛼
where 𝑘 ∈ 𝑅 and 𝑣 is a propositional atom. The semantics of 𝛼 w.r.t. an interpretation  , denoted 𝛼  (), is
𝑘 () = 𝑘,

{

𝑣 () =

{
¬𝑣 () =

𝑣∈

𝑒⊗
𝑒⊕

otherwise

𝑒⊕
𝑒⊗

otherwise

𝑣∈

,
,

𝛼1 + 𝛼2  () = 𝛼1  ()⊕𝛼2  (),
𝛼1 ∗ 𝛼2  () = 𝛼1  ()⊗𝛼2  ().
We can use weighted formulas to express calculations over a semiring, depending on the truth values of atoms with respect to an
interpretation.
Example 4 (cont’d). As mentioned before, the smokers program is a typical example from the probabilistic domain. Using weighted
formulas, we can introduce probabilities. We deﬁne

𝛼 =Π3𝑖=1 st(𝑖) ∗ 0.4 + ¬st(𝑖) ∗ 0.6

(1)

∗ Π𝑖,𝑗=1,2,3,𝑖+1≡𝑗 mod 3 inf(𝑖, 𝑗) ∗ 0.3 + ¬inf(𝑖, 𝑗) ∗ 0.7.

(2)

Line (1) tells us that every person 𝑖 is either stressed, with probability 0.4, or not stressed, with probability 0.6. With line (2) we
capture that for (𝑖, 𝑗) = (1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 1) person 𝑖 is inﬂuenced by person 𝑗 with probability 0.3 and not inﬂuenced with probability
0.7.
Using weighted formulas, we deﬁne algebraic measures as follows:
Deﬁnition 4 (Algebraic Measure). An algebraic measure 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩ consists of an answer set program Π, a weighted formula 𝛼 , and
a semiring . Then, the weight of an answer set  ∈ (Π) under 𝜇 is deﬁned by

𝜇() = 𝛼  ().
Additionally, the result of an (atomic) query for an atom 𝑎 ∈ (Π) is given by

𝜇(𝑎) =

⨁

∈(Π),𝑎∈ 𝜇(),

and the result of the overall weight query of Π is

𝜇(Π) =

⨁

∈(Π) 𝜇().

Example 5 (cont’d). Using algebraic measures, we perform probabilistic reasoning. We combine the weighted formula 𝛼 , which
handles the probabilities, and the program Π𝑠𝑚 , which handles the logical background theory, in the measure 𝜇𝑠𝑚 = ⟨Π𝑠𝑚 , 𝛼, ⟩.
Then, the answer set  = {st(1), sm(1)} has weight 𝜇𝑠𝑚 () = 0.4 ⋅ 0.62 ⋅ 0.73 .
The query 𝜇(sm(1)) corresponds to the probability that sm(1) holds. To evaluate it, we need to perform AASC, i.e. sum up the
probabilities of all answer sets s.t. sm(1) holds. Since Π𝑠𝑚 has 26 answer sets out of which 25 + 23 + 2 include sm(1), we refrain from
computing 𝜇(sm(1)) naïvely by considering all the answer sets separately. Instead, we consider the following three disjoint cases in
which sm(1) holds:
1. st(1) is true and the other probabilistic atoms take an arbitrary truth value;
7

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

2. st(1) is false, inf (3, 1) and st(3) are true and the other probabilistic atoms take an arbitrary truth value;
3. st(1) and st(3) are false, inf(3, 1), inf (2, 3) and st(2) are true, and inf(1, 2) takes an arbitrary truth value.
These three cases are exclusive, i.e. no answer set falls in any two of the cases, and furthermore, they cover all the answer sets
in which sm(1) is true. Thus, we can compute the probability of sm(1) as a sum of the probabilities of the three cases. These are
0.4, 0.6 ∗ 0.3 ∗ 0.4(= 0.072) and 0.6 ∗ 0.6 ∗ 0.3 ∗ 0.3 ∗ 0.4(= 0.01296), respectively, since it is enough to take the product of the
probabilities of the atoms whose truth values we assert as the other atoms that are left arbitrary only contribute a factor of 1. Thus,
𝜇(sm(1)) = 0.48496.
Following the conventions of [75], we also introduce factorized measures.
Deﬁnition 5 (Factorized Measure). Let 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩ be an algebraic measure and 𝐹 ⊆ (Π). Then, 𝜇 is factorized w.r.t. 𝐹 , if there is
a weight function 𝛽 ∶ 𝐹 ∪ {¬𝑓 ∣ 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 } → 𝑅 s.t. for all  ∈ (Π) it holds that

𝜇() =

⨂

𝑓 ∈𝐹 ∩ 𝛽(𝑓 )⊗

⨂

𝑓 ∈𝐹 ⧵ 𝛽(¬𝑓 ).

The diﬀerence between factorized and non-factorized measures is intuitively how complicated the weight function is. The former
must be expressible as a product of weights of literals that are true in a given interpretation, whereas the latter allow complex
arithmetic expressions using both the addition and multiplication of weights in dependence on the true literals in the interpretation.
The motivation behind considering factorized measures is that current frameworks, such as ProbLog and algebraic Prolog only
use factorized measures. This raises the question of whether this covers everything we need.
Example 6 (cont’d). The measure 𝜇𝑠𝑚 is factorized over st(𝑖), 𝑖 = 1, 2, 3 and inf(𝑖, 𝑗), 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗 mod 3, by letting 𝛽(st(𝑖)) = 0.4, 𝛽(¬st(𝑖)) =
0.6 and 𝛽(inf(𝑖, 𝑗)) = 0.3, 𝛽(¬st(𝑖, 𝑗)) = 0.7.
Not every measure is factorized however.
Example 7 (Non-factorized). For an example of a non-factorized measure, consider the following problem: Given a program Π, whose
answer sets correspond to feasible applicants for a software development position and which include whether the selected applicant
knows C++ (denoted by knows(𝑐)) and python (denoted by knows(𝑝)). We aim to give candidates an additional score of 2, if they
know both languages, a score of 1 of they know one of them, and a score of −1 if they know neither language.
We implement this using the measure

𝜇𝑤 = ⟨Π, knows(𝑐) + knows(𝑝) + (−1 ∗ ¬knows(𝑐) ∗ knows(𝑝)), ℤ⟩.
This measure is not factorized over 𝐹 = {knows(𝑐), knows(𝑝)} as there are no values 𝛽(knows(𝑐)), 𝛽(knows(𝑝)), 𝛽(¬knows(𝑐)),
𝛽(¬knows(𝑝)) ∈ ℤ, s.t.

𝛽(knows(𝑐)) ⋅ 𝛽(knows(𝑝)) = 2

𝛽(knows(𝑐)) ⋅ 𝛽(¬knows(𝑝)) = 1

𝛽(¬knows(𝑐)) ⋅ 𝛽(knows(𝑝)) = 1

𝛽(¬knows(𝑐)) ⋅ 𝛽(¬knows(𝑝)) = −1

Note that there are also no such values in ℝ.
While not every algebraic measure is factorized, there always exists a factorized measure that preserves weights of queries. To
establish this, we need some notation for sets of indexed subformulas of a weighted formula 𝛼 .
Deﬁnition 6 (Subformulas). Let 𝛼 be a weighted formula. Then, (𝛼) is the set of pairs (𝑖, 𝛽), where 𝛽 is a subformula of 𝛼 indexed
by a position-string 𝑖 ∈ {0, 1}∗ in the syntax-tree of 𝛼 , that is:
• For 𝛼 ∈ {𝑝(⃗
𝑥), ¬𝑝(⃗
𝑥), 𝑘} we let (𝛼) = {(𝜖, 𝛼)}.
• For 𝛼 ∈ {𝛼1 + 𝛼2 , 𝛼1 ∗ 𝛼2 } we let (𝛼) = {(𝜖, 𝛼)} ∪ {(0𝑟, 𝛽) ∣ (𝑟, 𝛽) ∈ (𝛼1 )} ∪ {(1𝑟, 𝛽) ∣ (𝑟, 𝛽) ∈ (𝛼2 )}.
Theorem 7 (Factorization). Let 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩ be an algebraic measure. Then, we can construct a factorized algebraic measure 𝜇′ =
⟨Π′ , 𝛼 ′ , ⟩ s.t. for 𝑎 ∈ (Π) ∶ 𝜇(𝑎) = 𝜇 ′ (𝑎) in linear time.
Proof (sketch). Intuitively, we implicitly apply the distributive law. For this, we introduce a new atom 𝛼𝑖 for every indexed subformula (𝑖, 𝛽) ∈ 𝑆(𝛼), which is true if the value of the subformula 𝛽 at index 𝑖 is included in the current product. To implement this, we
let Π′ = Π ∪ Πroot ∪ Π∗ ∪ Π+ ∪ Πleaf , where Π𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡 = {← not 𝛼0 } ensures that the value of the formula at the root is included.
8

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

⎧ 𝛼 ← 𝛼 ,𝛼
𝑖.0 𝑖.1
⎪ 𝑖
Π∗ = ⎨ ← 𝛼𝑖.0 , not 𝛼𝑖.1
⎪ ← not 𝛼𝑖.0 , 𝛼𝑖.1
⎩

⎫
⎪
(𝑖, 𝛽1 ∗ 𝛽2 ) ∈ (𝛼) ⎬
⎪
⎭

ensures that a subformula that uses multiplication is only included if both subformulas are included. Further, we ensure that either
both or none of the subformulas are included.

⎧ 𝛼 ←𝛼
𝑖.1
⎪ 𝑖
Π+ = ⎨ 𝛼𝑖 ← 𝛼𝑖.0
⎪ ← 𝛼𝑖.0 , 𝛼𝑖.1
⎩

⎫
⎪
(𝑖, 𝛽1 + 𝛽2 ) ∈ (𝛼) ⎬
⎪
⎭

ensures that a subformula that uses addition is only included if one of the subformulas is included. Furthermore, we ensure that at
most one of the subformulas is included.

Πleaf ={{𝛼𝑖 } ← 𝑎 ∣ (𝑖, 𝑎) ∈ (𝛼)} ∪
{{𝛼𝑖 } ← not 𝑎 ∣ (𝑖, ¬𝑎) ∈ (𝛼)} ∪
{{𝛼𝑖 } ← ∣ (𝑖, 𝑘) ∈ (𝛼), 𝑘 ∈ 𝑅}.
Formally, we deﬁne

𝛼 ′ = Π(𝑖,𝑘)∈(𝛼),𝑘∈𝑅 𝛼𝑖 ∗ 𝑘 + ¬𝛼𝑖 .
Then, 𝜇 ′ = ⟨Π′ , 𝛼 ′ , ⟩ is factorized, by choosing 𝐹 = {𝛼𝑖 ∣ (𝑖, 𝑘) ∈ (𝛼), 𝑘 ∈ 𝑅} and 𝛽(𝛼𝑖 ) = 𝑘, 𝛽(¬𝛼𝑖 ) = 𝑒⊗ .
Furthermore, along a similar line of reasoning as in [34] it follows that 𝜇(Π) = 𝜇 ′ (Π′ ). □
Hence, any AASC instance given as an algebraic measure can be reduced to AASC for a factorized measure. Thus, we can focus
on factorized measures during evaluation but allow for the speciﬁcation of measures in the general form.
4. Applications of AASC
We covered the introductory theory necessary when dealing with AASC and algebraic measures. In the following, we shortly
reiterate some of the prominent applications of AASC via instantiation with ﬁxed semirings.
The idea behind AASC is ubiquitous in quantitative reasoning: one takes a Boolean logic and turns it into a weighted logic, by
replacing conjunctions by multiplications and disjunctions by additions over a semiring. Other such semiring reasoning frameworks
are for example Semiring-based Constraint Satisfaction Problems [76], provenance semantics for datalog [77], and Algebraic Model
Counting (AMC) [30], to name only a few. Due to this, a wide range of applications of the semiring semantics are already known.
Kimmig et al. [30] give an extensive list of diﬀerent reasoning tasks that can be performed using the semiring semantics and discuss
the appropriate semirings for it.
We therefore do not extensively list all the diﬀerent possibilities here but focus on some that relate to existing extensions of ASP
and, thus, have higher relevance for our setting. Namely, we focus on two diﬀerent classes of problems and touch upon a third. First,
we consider problems that are #P-hard, i.e. at least as hard as counting the number of satisfying assignments of a propositional
formula. For these problems knowledge compilation is a well-established and competitive technique [46,45]. Second, when we work
over idempotent semirings, algebraic measure evaluation is often equivalent to O PT P-hard problems. Here, at least in the area of
Weighted MaxSAT, a prototypical O PT P-hard problem, knowledge compilation does not seem to be a good strategy, given that none
of the solvers of the recent MaxSAT Evaluation [78] is knowledge compilation based. Thus, while we relate AASC to O PT P-hard
problems here and cover their solution also with our implementation (which works for general commutative semirings), we do not
expect performance improvements compared to specialized tools such as clingo [79] here.
We note that there are relevant problems that are in a complexity class above #P. Recent work [32] showed that many such
problems can be solved by AASC over two semirings but not over one of them. Here, the problems are typically harder than AASC
over one semiring, since they remain NP-hard on the usual tractable circuit representations [80]. Note that, as with the O PT P-hard
problems, an implementation that works for general semirings is available but not further considered here, since we focus on the
evaluation of problems that are #P-hard but solvable on typical tractable circuit representations. For details we refer the interested
reader to [32].
4.1. #P-hard problems
Probabilistic reasoning The most common application that involves weighted model counting over the answer sets, in the typical
sense, is probabilistic inference as in ProbLog, LPMLN , or P-log. The speciﬁcation and semantics of probabilistic programs as well as
the allowed class of programs varies between the languages. In fact, there is also Credal Semantics for probabilistic programs [81],
which we however leave untreated in this work.
The main diﬀerence between the treated languages is that ProbLog uses Sato’s distribution semantics [82], which assumes that
the only non-determinism in the program is due to a set of probabilistic facts and that the program has no constraints. This means
9

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

that any given truth assignment to the probabilistic facts can be uniquely extended to a stable model of the program. The beneﬁt of
this restriction is that the measure speciﬁed by the program directly satisﬁes the axioms of a probability distribution, e.g. the weights
of all answer sets add up to one. On the other hand, LPMLN and P-log do not impose such a restriction, thus allowing for a broader
class of programs. Here, in order to obtain a probability measure, the probability of an answer set is not its weight but its normalized
weight. That is, its weight is divided by the sum of the weights of all answer sets.
Apart from that, LPMLN features another property. Namely, while ProbLog and P-log only allow for weights of atoms or rules that
are between 0 and 1, LPMLN allows for any real number as a weight.
For probabilistic inference by means of AASC, both of these diﬀerences are not signiﬁcant. We can perform probabilistic inference
in any of the three languages by evaluating an algebraic measure over an answer set program. For ProbLog programs, it is suﬃcient
to evaluate 𝜇(𝑎) for the algebraic measure 𝜇 corresponding to the program to obtain the probability that the query atom 𝑎 is true
according to the program. In the ProbLog case, we can use the probabilistic semiring  since only weights in [0, 1] occur. For LPMLN
and P-log programs, we can compute the probability of a query atom 𝑎 by evaluating 𝜇(𝑎) and 𝜇(not 𝑎) over the semiring ℝ of the
real numbers. Then, 𝑃 𝑟(𝑎), the probability of 𝑎, is 𝜇(𝑎)∕𝜇(𝑎)+𝜇(not 𝑎). For a closer look at the relationship of the diﬀerent probabilistic
logic programming languages we refer to [83,10,38].
Neuro-symbolic reasoning Neuro-symbolic reasoning, as for example in DeepProbLog [1], takes the idea of probabilistic reasoning
with programs one step further. Here, instead of assuming that the probabilities of rules and facts are given, they are determined by
a machine learning model that predicts the probability of a fact or rule for a given ground instantiation of it. Instead of having the
same probability of stress for each person

0.4 ∶∶ stress(𝑋) ∶ ∓ person(𝑋),
we might have a neural predicate nn∓stress(𝐴𝑔𝑒, 𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡) that models the probability of a person being stressed based on age
and employment. In the DeepProbLog language, this would be expressed as

nn∓stress(𝐴, 𝐸) ∶∶ stress ∶ ∓ person(𝑋), age(𝐴, 𝑋), employment(𝐸, 𝑋).
We consider two tasks in neuro-symbolic reasoning that need to be solved.
(T1) Determine the probability of a query, given a neuro-symbolic program.
For DeepProbLog, this again corresponds to a query using an algebraic measure: when the machine learning model that predicts
the probabilities of facts and rules is ﬁxed we can see DeepProbLog programs as ProbLog programs and, thus, evaluate probabilistic
queries using algebraic measures. Here, we can again use the probabilistic semiring  .
(T2) Train the model to predict the correct probabilities.
Usually, this is done using gradient descent to minimize some error function 𝑒𝑟𝑟 that depends on the output of the neural networks.
In order to use gradient descent, it is necessary to compute the derivative of 𝑒𝑟𝑟. In the DeepProbLog setting, this can be rather
complicated, as 𝑒𝑟𝑟 is not limited to measuring whether the predicted value was correct. Instead, the error can also be determined
by the probability of a derived atom. E.g. in the smokers setting, we may have data about whether a person smokes but not about a
persons stress. Thus, applying gradient descent to the error function of the smokers model involves obtaining its derivative in terms
of the output of the neural network.
Manhaeve et al. [1] showed that we can compute this gradient by weighted model counting over the gradient semiring 𝐺𝑅𝐴𝐷.
Therefore, we can also model this task using an algebraic measure over

𝐺𝑅𝐴𝐷 = ([0, 1] × ℝ, ⊕, ⊗, (0, 0), (1, 0)),
where

(𝑝1 , 𝑑1 )⊕(𝑝2 , 𝑑2 ) = (𝑝1 + 𝑝2 , 𝑑1 + 𝑑2 )
(𝑝1 , 𝑑1 )⊗(𝑝2 , 𝑑2 ) = (𝑝1 𝑝2 , 𝑑1 𝑝2 + 𝑑2 𝑝1 ).
Intuitively, the ﬁrst entry corresponds to the probability, as before, whereas the second entry computes the derivative of the ﬁrst
with respect to some parameter.
Knowledge compilation Using the AASC approach we may further obtain a tractable circuit representation of the program. This may
seem counterintuitive, since we said in the Introduction that we use knowledge compilation to perform AASC and not the other
way around. However, it shows that when we can do weighted model counting over semirings, then we can also do knowledge
compilation.
For knowledge compilation, we need a somewhat non-standard semiring similar to the provenance semirings of Green et al. [77].
Given a semiring  and a set of propositional atoms  , we deﬁne the knowledge compilation semiring of algebraic circuits over 
and  as
10

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

(, ) = ((, ), +, ∗, ⊥, ⊤)
(, ) = {𝛼 ∣ 𝛼 is an algebraic circuit over  and }
𝛼+𝛽 =𝛼+𝛽
𝛼∗𝛽 =𝛼∗𝛽
Here, an algebraic circuit over  and  is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where each vertex is labeled by either +, ∗, a literal
𝑙 ∈ Lit() with Lit() =  ∪ {¬𝑣 ∣ 𝑣 ∈ }, or a semiring value 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅, in such a manner that vertices without incoming edges are
either labeled by a literal or a semiring value and vertices with incoming edges are either labeled by + or ∗. Furthermore, there must
be exactly one vertex that does not have outgoing edges, which we refer to as the output.
Clearly, using the standard equality in the sense of syntactical equality is inadequate, since (, ) is not commutative:

𝑎 + 𝑏 ≠syntax 𝑏 + 𝑎.
We instead use semantic equality, i.e. two algebraic circuits 𝛼, 𝛽 ∈ (, ) are semantically equal if for every weight assignment
𝜎 ∶ Lit() → 𝑅 it holds that
𝛼[𝜎] = 𝛽[𝜎] .
Here, 𝛼[𝜎] denotes that we replace every literal 𝑙 in 𝛼 by 𝜎(𝑙) its semiring value under 𝜎 . Then, 𝛼[𝜎] corresponds to evaluating
the circuit by inductively deﬁning the value of a node with a semiring label 𝑟 as 𝑟 and the value of a node labeled by + (resp. ∗) with
⨁𝑛
⨂𝑛
incoming nodes with values 𝑟1 , … , 𝑟𝑛 as 𝑖=1 𝑟𝑖 (resp. 𝑖=1 𝑟𝑖 . The ﬁnal value of 𝛼[𝜎] is then given by the value of the output of
the circuit.
Note that this idea is not new: Kimmig et al. [29] introduced a BDD semiring, where conjunction and disjunction correspond to
the respective operation on BDDs, thus, allowing knowledge compilation to a BDD. However, in contrast to the BDD semiring, our
semiring allows any kind of algebraic circuit, even those that classically do not correspond to a tractable circuit class such as BDD,
SDD, or d-DNNF.
Apart from this, we may obtain syntactically diﬀerent results depending on how we evaluate a query over (, ). This,
however, is of no concern to us. We can show that given any such syntactic representation of the result, we can evaluate meaningful
queries.
Lemma 8 (Semiring Knowledge Compilation). Let 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩ be a factorized algebraic measure with weight function 𝛽 that factorizes 𝜇 .
Furthermore, let

𝜇𝐾𝐶 = ⟨Π, 𝛼𝐾𝐶 , ((Π), )⟩
𝛼𝐾𝐶 = Π𝑣∈(Π) (𝑣 ∗ 𝐯 + ¬𝑣 ∗ ¬𝐯),
where we write atoms in italics 𝑣 and semiring values in boldface 𝐯.
Then, given any algebraic circuit 𝛾 that represents the result of 𝜇𝐾𝐶 (Π), we have that 𝜇(Π) = 𝛾[𝜎𝛽 ] (∅), where 𝜎𝛽 ∶ Lit((Π) → 𝑅 is
given by 𝜎𝛽 (𝑙) = 𝛽(𝑙).
Thus, given any algebraic circuit 𝛾 that corresponds to the result of the knowledge compilation query 𝜇𝐾𝐶 (Π), we can evaluate
any factorized measure query over  using 𝛾 in linearly many semiring operations in the size of 𝛾 . Thus, the key is to compute a
small circuit 𝛾 and the latter eﬃciently. It is well-known that such arithmetic circuits can easily be obtained from BDDs, SDDs, or
d-DNNFs [26], by replacing disjunctions and conjunctions by additions and multiplications, respectively.
For us the algebraic circuit semirings are not only of theoretical but also of practical interest. Namely, as we describe in more
detail later in the section on implementation, we use SHARP SAT-TD [47], which enables weighted model counting over semirings.
Thus, we can use it for knowledge compilation using the idea of the algebraic circuit semirings. This again shows the power of the
semiring paradigm. Since SHARP SAT-TD is implemented in such a manner that it works for general commutative semirings, we can
solve a variety of diﬀerent interesting tasks by performing a minor modiﬁcation. In fact, the adaptation of SHARP SAT-TD to enable
knowledge compilation to smooth d-DNNF was possible in less than 500 lines of code, including the parsing of additional input
arguments and the adaptation of the preprocessor to handle weights over general semirings. Details and an independent evaluation
can be found in the corresponding conference paper [84].
4.2. OptP-hard problems
The applications discussed above share the fact that they are Weighted Model Counting problems in the strict sense, i.e. they are
#P-hard. We thus expect that they are practically harder to solve using current implementations than other AASC problems which
are not #P-hard. For example, AASC over the Boolean semiring 𝔹 corresponds to checking the consistency of an answer set program
and is therefore NP-complete. Arguably, it makes sense to consider such problems which are practically easier to solve separately.
11

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Another class of problems that are aﬀected by this reasoning are optimization problems. There is a broad variety of extensions of
ASP that introduce diﬀerent ways to add preferences to programs [23,24]. We focus instead on the Most Probable Explanation (MPE)
task from the probabilistic logic programming literature [85], which also ﬁts into the context of optimization problems.
Most probable explanation The Most Probable Explanation (MPE) task is to determine the most likely probabilistic choices that led
to a set of observed facts. We consider it in the setting of ProbLog programs.
Deﬁnition 9 (MPE). Given a ProbLog program Π and a set 𝐸 = {𝑒1 , … , 𝑒𝑛 } of atoms called evidence, MPE is to determine the most
likely assignment to the probabilistic facts such that 𝐸 is entailed. That is to compute

𝑝∗ =

∏

argmax

∈(Π),𝐸⊆ 𝑝∶∶𝑓 ∈Π,𝑓 ∈

∏

𝑝⋅

(1 − 𝑝).

(3)

𝑝∶∶𝑓 ∈Π,𝑓 ∉

As we have seen before, we can deﬁne a measure 𝜇 over the probabilistic semiring  such that

∏

𝜇() =

𝑝⋅

𝑝∶∶𝑓 ∈Π,𝑓 ∈

∏

(1 − 𝑝).

𝑝∶∶𝑓 ∈Π,𝑓 ∉

Naturally, we could use 𝜇 as a function to optimize for modeling MPE. However, it would be desirable to have an algebraic measure
whose overall weight corresponds to the solution of MPE.
Indeed, we can construct such a measure based on the max-times semiring max,⋅ . Recall that the multiplication of max,⋅
corresponds to the usual product and that the addition corresponds to taking the maximum. Then, we can use the following formula
𝛼𝐿 over max to compute the likelihood, i.e. the logarithm of the probability of a given assignment to the probabilistic facts:

Π𝑝∶∶𝑓 ∈Π (𝑓 ∗ 𝑝 + ¬𝑓 ∗ (1 − 𝑝)).
Lemma 10 (MPE as AASC). Given a ProbLog program Π and evidence 𝐸 , the overall weight of the algebraic measure 𝜇 = ⟨Π ∪ { ∶ ∓ not 𝑒 ∣
𝑒 ∈ 𝐸}, 𝛼𝐿 , max,⋅ ⟩ is equal to 𝑝∗ in Equation (3), the maximum likelihood of any assignment to the probabilistic facts in Π such that 𝐸 is
entailed.
Notably, this does not solve MPE strictly speaking, since we do not know the assignment that leads to the maximum probability.
However, we can extend the max-times semiring max,⋅ to perform bookkeeping that tracks which interpretation was used. For this,
we use pairs (𝑝, ), where 𝑝 ∈ ℝ and  is a partial interpretation. Then, addition of two such pairs (𝑝𝑖 , 𝑖 ), 𝑖 = 1, 2 takes that pair,
where 𝑝𝑖 is maximal, breaking ties with an arbitrary but ﬁxed order on the partial interpretations. Multiplication of two such pairs
results in (𝑝1 ⋅ 𝑝2 , 1 ∪ 2 ). By changing the probabilistic facts 𝑓 with weight 𝑝 to have weight (𝑝, {𝑓 }) instead, we obtain the desired
output.
4.3. Harder problems
There are also problems harder than #P, i.e. problems that stay hard on d-DNNFs without additional restrictions. Such problems
frequently occur in probabilistic logic programming. Some examples are Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) problems, probabilistic inference using the semantics for general answer set programs of Totis et al. [15] and Skryagin et al. [20], and Maximum Expected Utility
(MEU) problems [26,25].
What all these problems share is that they come with a partition 𝑋𝑂 , 𝑋𝐼 of the variables and two semirings 𝑂 , 𝐼 such that
their ﬁnal result can be expressed as

(
)
⨂𝑂
𝑂
𝑂 ⊆𝑋𝑂
𝑙∈lit(𝑋𝑂 ),𝑂 ⊧𝑙 𝛼𝑂 (𝑙)⊗ 𝑡 𝐴𝐴𝑆𝐶(𝑂 ) , where
⨂
⨁
𝐴𝐴𝑆𝐶(𝑂 ) = 𝐼 ⊆𝑋 , ∪ ∈(Π) 𝐼𝑙∈lit(𝑋 ),⊧𝑙 𝛼𝐼 (𝑙),
𝐼
𝐼 𝑂
𝐼
𝐼
⨁𝑂

(4)
(5)

for functions 𝛼𝑂 and 𝛼𝐼 that assign the literals over 𝑋𝑂 and 𝑋𝐼 a weight from 𝑂 and 𝐼 , respectively, and a transformation
function 𝑡 that maps semiring values from 𝐼 to 𝑂 . Intuitively, this means that we have to solve one AASC instance 𝐴𝐴𝑆𝐶(𝑂 )
for each assignment 𝑂 to the outer variables 𝑋𝑂 and sum up the results, i.e. we need to perform nested AASC.
Consider for example the MAP problem. It is similar to MPE in the sense that both problems we ask for the most likely assignment
to a set of variables 𝑋𝑂 , given some evidence. However, while for MPE the probability of the most likely assignment is determined
as the product of the probabilities of the assignments to the variables in 𝑋𝑂 , in MAP this product is multiplied by the marginal
probability over the remaining probabilistic variables in the set 𝑋𝐼 . Thus, for MAP the expression in (5) corresponds to

argmax

∏

𝑂 ⊆𝑋𝑂 𝑙∈lit(𝑋 ),⊧𝑙
𝑂

𝛼𝑂 (𝑙) ⋅

∑

∏

𝐼 ⊆𝑋𝐼 ,𝑂 ∪𝐼 ∈(Π) 𝑙∈lit(𝑋𝐼 ),⊧𝑙

𝛼𝐼 (𝑙)

= argmax 𝑃 𝑟(𝑂 ) ⋅ 𝑃 𝑟(𝐸 ∣ 𝑂 ),
𝑂 ⊆𝑋𝑂

12

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel
Grounding

Π

Cycle Breaking

Simpliﬁcation

Π

Π

Π

Clark’s Completion

𝐶

Knowledge Compilation



Evaluation

𝑟
Fig. 3. Schema of the overall workﬂow of existing solvers for the evaluation of AASC problems.

where 𝑃 𝑟(𝑂 ) and 𝑃 𝑟(𝐸 ∣ 𝑂 ) denote the probability of 𝑂 and the probability of the evidence 𝐸 given 𝑂 , respectively. The inner
sum computes 𝑃 𝑟(𝐸 ∣ 𝑂 ), the conditional probability of 𝐸 given the assignment 𝑂 to the outer variables 𝑋𝑂 and the outer sum
takes the maximum over all assignments to the outer variables. Here, we assume that Π includes the constraints that the evidence
should hold, as in Lemma 10.
Since all these problems are also deﬁnable algebraically and can be solved by compilation to constrained tractable circuits instead
of arbitrary tractable circuits, the results of the rest of the paper are also relevant for this setting. Again, we see the ﬂexibility of the
algebraic approach that allows us to consider a large variety in the same manner. For more details, including the adaptations that
are necessary in the knowledge compilation step to allow for constrained knowledge compilation we refer to [32].
5. Solving AASC problems
The main goal of our work is to solve AASC problems more eﬃciently. In order to do so, we need to aggregate the values
associated with each answer set of a program by the weighted formula. Already computing one answer set is NP-hard and computing
an aggregate of over all of them can be even harder, depending on the chosen aggregate, which in our setting corresponds to the
addition of the semiring. There has, however, been a lot of research on diﬀerent approaches that can be used to overcome this
hardness in an eﬀort to provide an eﬃcient implementation [36,35,58,39,13]. While these approaches diﬀer signiﬁcantly in their
details, they usually follow a similar overall workﬂow.
In this section, we give a broad overview of both the shared workﬂow and the diﬀerences between the approach to arrive at a
solution. Especially, we investigate the conditions under which each of the approaches is likely to succeed. This is interesting, on the
one hand, from a user perspective, as it can allow one to make an informed choice for a tool, depending on the conditions satisﬁed
by the instances at hand. On the other hand, it is useful for us since we can select the most promising approach as the basis for our
work.
5.1. Overall workﬂow
A schema of the general pipeline that is usually shared between diﬀerent solvers is shown in Fig. 3. Many steps are optional
and diﬀerent solvers use diﬀerent paths through this pipeline. Usually, solvers accept possibly non-ground programs Π with some
additional annotations for the algebraic measure. Often, this program is then grounded, resulting in a propositional program, which
is simpliﬁed in the next step. Afterwards, the actual AASC starts, by converting the program into an equivalent tractable circuit
representation  via some form of knowledge compilation (KC). In the last step, the result is obtained by evaluation over the circuit  .
Before we go into more details, we would like to note that in some solvers these steps are intertwined instead of being executed one
after the other.
We focus on the knowledge compilation step. First, there has already been a lot of work on the other steps of the pipeline: Fierens
et al. [35] showed that for probabilistic inference with ProbLog programs, it is suﬃcient to restrict oneself to the relevant ground
part of the program, which can signiﬁcantly reduce the size of the problem. Tsamoura et al. [86] went even further and used the
magic set technique [87] to identify the relevant part during grounding, thus, eliminating the need to even produce the remaining
irrelevant part in this phase. Additionally, Shterionov [88, Chapter 3] thoroughly investigated a wide range of simpliﬁcations for
probabilistic logic programs that were shown to lead to signiﬁcantly improved solving times on many benchmark sets.
13

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel
Table 1
Diﬀerent possibilities for the knowledge compilation step accompanied by
a tractability guarantee in terms of an appropriate parameter. Here, 𝑝𝑡𝑤 is
short for primal treewidth, 𝑝𝑑𝑡𝑤 (resp. 𝑝𝑑𝑝𝑤) are short for the treewidth
(resp. pathwidth) of the primal graph that additionally includes an edge between any two atoms that are in a positive cyclic dependency. Furthermore,
𝐶 denotes a CNF and Π a program.
KC Step

Tractability Guarantee

Implemented in

program to MODS
CNF to sd-DNNF

Θ(|(Π)| ⋅ |(Π)|)
𝑝𝑡𝑤
(2
( |𝐶|)
)

LPMLN , plingo
ProbLog

acyclic program to SDD
acyclic program to OBDD
program to sd-DNNF
dynamic programming

(𝑝𝑡𝑤+2)2(𝑝𝑡𝑤+1) +1

+1
 22
|Π|
(
)
(𝑝𝑝𝑤+2)
 2(𝑝𝑝𝑤+2)2
|Π|

- (

𝑝𝑡𝑤+2

 22

)
|Π|

ProbLog
PITA
(ProbLog)
dynasp

Second, we argue that the knowledge compilation step has the largest potential for improvement and is likely to lead to the
biggest eﬀect. Due to these reasons, we focus on the knowledge compilation step, as we assume its investigation to be the most
fruitful.
5.2. Knowledge compilation
The idea behind knowledge compilation is the following: while certain problems, such as AASC, are hard on general logical
theories, there are so called tractable circuit representations, where this is not the case. Here, we shortly summarize the diﬀerent
theoretical guarantees associated with compiling a given representation of programs to prominent circuit classes in addition to
implementations that support them. For a more in-depth introduction and discussion, we refer the interested reader to Appendix B.
A summary is given in Table 1. We see that compiling to MODS leads to a circuit of size linear in the number of answer sets.
Thus, this strategy is tempting, when there are “few” of them, which is however rarely the case for probabilistic logic programs,
where the number of answer sets grows exponentially in the number of probabilistic facts. For the compilation of CNFs and acyclic
programs as well as the explicit dynamic programming approach [21], we see that the guarantees strongly depend on the structural
parameters, i.e., treewidth or pathwidth of associated structures. Here, the guarantee for CNFs seems to be the most desirable, due to
the single exponential dependency on treewidth compared to the at least double exponential dependency for the other approaches.
It is, however, important to note that
) upper bounds, rather than lower bounds, and (2) Amarilli et al. [52] were
( (1) these are only
able to obtain an upper bound of  25(𝑘+1) ⋅ |Vars(𝐶)| by slightly loosening the requirements for SDDs. Therefore, we may obtain
much better performance in practice as the guarantees suggest.
For the direct compilation of programs to sd-DNNF as given by Aziz et al. [89], no guarantees are known. It is interesting, since
contrary to CNF and acyclic program compilation, here, the requirement for stability of models is taken care of during compilation
rather than beforehand. Taking care of it in advance during cycle breaking requires transformations that may increase the treewidth
and size of programs. Here, this is solved by adding so called loop formulas [90], which are clauses that prohibit cyclic derivations,
during compilation. However, loop formulas as introduced by Lin and Zhao [90] may span a whole SCC of the dependency graph of
the program.3 This can destroy previously low treewidth and be devastating for the compilation performance. Apart from that, not
only the treewidth may suﬀer: we may end up with exponentially many additional clauses in the size of the largest SCC [91]. This
version of D SHARP was removed from the ProbLog implementation, presumably for the above reasons. While there are strategies
to reduce the number of necessary loop formulas [92,93], their adaptation would not circumvent the exponential worst case lower
bound on the number of added clauses.
Summary Summing up, we see that there is a wide range of diﬀerent approaches to knowledge compilation or more generally solving
AASC problems, coming with diﬀerent theoretical guarantees. Mostly, the guarantees are exponential in a structural parameter
associated with the formula that is to be compiled. The only exception is the approach of the solvers LPMLN [10] and plingo [38]
that enumerate all the models.
The most promising theoretical results are known for the compilation of CNFs to sd-DNNFs. Furthermore, the recent work of
Korhonen and Järvisalo [47] showed that one can achieve performance improvements by using the latter explicitly. This begs the
question whether and how we can convert programs of low treewidth into CNFs of low treewidth, in order to fruitfully exploit these
recent advancements.
6. Clark’s completion
A crucial step in the translation of programs to CNF formulas is the well-known Clark’s Completion [54]. While it is deﬁned on
general programs, it is only guaranteed to lead to an equivalent CNF, when the program it was applied to does not have cycles in

3

They usually contain even more variables, however already this is devastating for knowledge compilation.
14

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

its positive dependence graph. The traditional, most well-known version of Clark’s Completion does not allow for bounds on the
treewidth of the resulting CNF in terms of the treewidth of the primal graph of the original program. There has, however, already
been work by Hecher that does imply such bounds. In the following, we ﬁrst discuss the original version of Clark’s Completion and
its limitations as well as the modiﬁcations by Hecher. After that we show that even Hecher’s version allows for further improvements
and introduce an extended version for which we can obtain better bounds.
The idea behind Clark’s Completion is the following: if we have an atom 𝑎 that is in the head of the rules 𝑟1 , … , 𝑟𝑛 , then 𝑎 is only
included in a stable model if we are forced to derive it due to one of these rules. More formally, the deﬁnition is as follows:
Deﬁnition 11 (Clark’s Completion). Let Π be a normal answer set program. Then, Clark’s Completion of Π is deﬁned as the propositional formula

⋀

Clark Prop (Π) =

⋁ ⋀

𝑎↔

𝑙,

𝑟∈Π𝑎 𝑙∈𝐵(𝑟)

𝑎∈(Π)

where for an atom 𝑎 ∈ (Π), we let Π𝑎 = {𝑟 ∈ Π ∣ 𝐻(𝑟) = 𝑎}.
For convenience reasons, we also introduce Clark(Π) as the CNF

(

⋀

⋁

¬𝑎 ∨

𝑎∈(Π)

⋀

(

𝑟∈Π

𝑟∈Π𝑎

forced𝑟 ∨

forced𝑟 ∧

⋁

⋀
𝑟∈Π𝑎

¬𝑙 ∧

𝑙∈𝐵(𝑟)

)

𝑎 ∨ ¬forced𝑟

⋀
𝑙∈𝐵(𝑟)

∧
)

¬forced𝑟 ∨ 𝑙 ,

where forced𝑟 for 𝑟 ∈ Π is an auxiliary variable such that intuitively forced𝑟 is true iﬀ every literal in the body of 𝑟 is satisﬁed, which
is ensured by the second line.
Formally, we obtain:
Lemma 12 (Folklore). Let Π be an answer set program. Then, (i) every model  of Clark Prop (Π) can be uniquely extended to a model
 ′ of Clark(Π) by assigning forced𝑟 to true, if  ′ ⊧ 𝐵(𝑟) and to false, otherwise, and (ii) for every model  of Clark(Π) the interpretation
 ′ =  ∩ (Π) is a model of Clark Prop (Π).
The way we use Clark’s Completion is to translate programs into equivalent propositional formulas. The following gives a suﬃcient
condition for this to work.
Theorem 13 ([54]). Let Π be a normal answer set program. If the dependency graph DEP(Π) of Π is acyclic, then every model of
Clark Prop (Π) is an answer set of Π and vice versa.
6.1. Primal tree decomposition guidance
For now, we disregard the acyclicity requirement of Clark’s Completion and consider only the change in treewidth as a result of
applying Clark’s Completion. Unfortunately, as the following example shows, we cannot give treewidth guarantees for Clark(Π) in
terms of the treewidth of Π.
Example 8 (Treewidth Bounds I). Consider the program Π𝑛 consisting of rules

𝑟1 ∶ 𝑎 ← 𝑏1 , … , 𝑟𝑛 ∶ 𝑎 ← 𝑏𝑛
The treewidth of PRIM(Π𝑛 ) is 1, since the only edges are for the form (𝑎, 𝑏𝑖 ), which means that PRIM(Π𝑛 ) is a tree. On the other
hand, the CNF version of Clark’s Completion of Π𝑛 contains the following clauses to model the truth of the atom 𝑎:

¬𝑎 ∨

𝑛
⋁
𝑗=1

forced𝑟𝑗 ,

forced𝑟𝑖 ∨ ¬𝑏𝑖 ,
Due to the clause ¬𝑎 ∨
Clark(Π𝑛 ) is 𝑛.

⋁𝑛

𝑎 ∨ ¬forced𝑟𝑖 ,

for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛

¬forced𝑟𝑖 ∨ 𝑏𝑖 ,

for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛.

𝑖=1 forced 𝑟𝑖 , the primal graph of Clark(Π𝑛 ) contains a clique of size 𝑛 + 1. Therefore, the treewidth of

This is a problem, if we want to use the treewidth of the CNF we obtain from Clark’s Completion to bound the time needed to
solve an AASC instance. However, this problem can be avoided by introducing further auxiliary variables that intuitively save partial
results and thus limit the dependence of the variables among each other.
15

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Example 9 (cont.). Consider instead of the set of clauses from Example 8 the following alternative clauses:

¬𝑎 ∨ part𝑛 ,

𝑎 ∨ ¬part𝑛

¬part𝑖 ∨ 𝑏𝑖 ∨ part𝑖−1 ,

part𝑖 ∨ ¬𝑏𝑖 ,

(6)
part𝑖 ∨ ¬part𝑖−1

for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛

¬part0 .

(7)
(8)

Here, part𝑖 for 𝑖 = 0, 1, … , 𝑛 are auxiliary variables. Intuitively, part𝑖 is responsible for storing a partial result. Namely, part𝑖 is true
iﬀ one of 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑖 is true and consequently there is a reason to derive 𝑎 from one of the ﬁrst 𝑖 rules. This is ensured by the clauses
in (8) and (7). Indeed, as part0 is false, so part1 ↔ 𝑏1 holds as well as part𝑖 ↔ part𝑖−1 ∨ 𝑏𝑖 for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛. Finally, the clauses in (6)
ensure that 𝑎 is true iﬀ any of the (ﬁrst 𝑛) rules ﬁres by ensuring that it 𝑎 is equivalent to part𝑛 .
While the primal graph of this CNF has treewidth 2 which is higher than the one of PRIM(Π𝑛 ) that has treewidth 1, it is
independent of 𝑛, in contrast to the treewidth of Clark(Π𝑛 ).
The idea of the previous example is formalized as PClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ) a revised deﬁnition of Clark Prop (Π) given by Hecher [55]
that uses a tree decomposition  with root 𝑡r of the primal graph of Π for guiding the Clark Completion. It leads to the following
guarantee:
Theorem 14 ([55]). Given a normal answer set program Π and a tree decomposition  = (𝑇 , 𝜒) of PRIM(Π) with width 𝑘 and root 𝑡r , the
CNF PClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ) can be constructed in time linear in |Π| + |𝑇 | and satisﬁes that
(i) every model of Clark Prop (Π) can be uniquely extended to a model of PClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ),
(ii) the size of PClark(Π,  ) is in (𝑘|Π|), and
(iii) the treewidth of PRIM(PClark(Π,  , 𝑡r )) is at most 3(𝑘 + 1).
Intuitively, we can avoid a higher increase in treewidth by avoiding long clauses introduced by large disjunctions 𝑎1 ∨ ⋯ ∨ 𝑎𝑛 .
For this, we apply the Tseitin transformation to obtain multiple shorter clauses that correspond to 𝑎1 ∨ 𝑎2 ∨ part1 , part1 ↔ 𝑎3 ∨
part2 , … , part𝑛−3 ↔ 𝑎𝑛−1 ∨ 𝑎𝑛 .
We do not spell out PClark(.), as we will give a further improved version. Notably, Clark’s Completion may also introduce large
conjunctions, which we also wish to avoid if they artiﬁcially increase the treewidth.
6.2. Incidence tree decomposition guidance
We have seen that we can use a tree decomposition of the primal graph of a program to limit the increase in the treewidth during
translation to CNF that is caused by many rules that have the same atom in the head. Another factor that can lead to artiﬁcially high
treewidth are long rules:
Example 10 (Treewidth Bounds II). Consider the program Π𝑛 with the single rule

𝑟 ∶ 𝑎 ← 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 .
The treewidth of PRIM(Π𝑛 ) is 𝑛, since it is a clique on 𝑛 + 1 vertices. Thus, Theorem 14 guarantees us a CNF of treewidth at most
3(𝑛 + 1). In this case, this upper bound is not helpful, since already the usual version of Clark’s Completion results in the following
clauses to model the truth of atom 𝑎:

𝑎 ∨ ¬forced𝑟 ,
forced𝑟 ∨

𝑛
⋁
𝑖=1

¬𝑎 ∨ forced𝑟 ,
¬𝑏𝑖 ,

𝑛
⋀
(
𝑖=1

)
¬forced𝑟 ∨ 𝑏𝑖 .

The primal graph of this CNF also has treewidth 𝑛, which is better than our upper bound.
We can avoid the long clauses by using the following propositional formula instead:

𝑎 ↔ 𝑏1 ∧ part1 ,
part𝑖 ↔ 𝑏𝑖+1 ∧ part𝑖+1 ,

for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 − 3,

part𝑛−2 ↔ 𝑏𝑛−1 ∧ 𝑏𝑛 .
The treewidth of the primal graph of the corresponding CNF is 2 and therefore independent of 𝑛.
As previously, we see that we can decrease the treewidth of the CNF resulting from Clark’s Completion by introducing auxiliary
variables. The diﬀerence here is that we introduce them for conjunctions instead of disjunctions. Unfortunately, as we have also seen
16

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

𝑏𝑛

…

𝑟

𝑏1

𝑎

𝑏1

𝑎

…

𝑏𝑛

Fig. 4. The primal graph (left) and the incidence graph of the program Π𝑛 from Example 11.

in the example, a tree decomposition of the primal graph of the program is unlikely to help us: it also assigns a high treewidth to the
program even if has a simple representation.
We overcome this problem by considering the incidence graph of the program instead of the primal graph.
Example 11 (cont.). The incidence graph of Π𝑛 in Example 10 is shown in Fig. 4; as it is a tree, it has treewidth 1.
Deﬁnition 15 (Incidence Tree Decomposition-guided Clark’s Completion). Let Π be a normal answer set program and  = (𝑇 , 𝜒) a tree
decomposition of INC (Π) with root 𝑡r . Then, IClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ) the Incidence Tree Decomposition-guided Clark’s Completion of Π with
respect to (𝑇 , 𝜒) and root 𝑡r is deﬁned as the propositional formula
upto𝑎𝑡 ↔

⋁

upto𝑎𝑡′ ∨

⋁

for 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑎 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)

(9)

for 𝑡, 𝑡′ ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑎 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡′ ) ⧵ 𝜒(𝑡), 𝑡′ ∈ children(𝑡)

(10)

for 𝑎 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡r )

(11)

for 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)

(12)

forced𝑟 ↔ upto𝑟𝑡′

for 𝑡, 𝑡′ ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡′ ) ⧵ 𝜒(𝑡), 𝑡′ ∈ children(𝑡)

(13)

forced𝑟 ↔ upto𝑟𝑡
r

for 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡r )

(14)

𝑡′ ∈children(𝑡),𝑎∈𝜒(𝑡′ )

𝑟∈𝜒(𝑡),𝐻(𝑟)=𝑎

forced𝑟

𝑎 ↔ upto𝑎𝑡′
𝑎 ↔ upto𝑎𝑡
r
upto𝑟𝑡 ↔

⋀

𝑡′ ∈children(𝑡),𝑟∈𝜒(𝑡′ )

upto𝑟𝑡′ ∧

⋀

𝑏

𝑏∈𝜒(𝑡),𝑏∈𝐵(𝑟)

The basic intuition here is the same as with the original CNF version of Clark’s Completion, i.e. we introduce additional variables
that are deﬁned as equivalent to subformulas. The variables of the form upto𝑎𝑡 for 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 and 𝑎 ∈ (Π) intuitively capture whether 𝑎 is
derived by any of the rules that occur in 𝜒(𝑡) or 𝜒(𝑡′ ) for a descendant 𝑡′ of 𝑡. This is ensured in (9). Then, in (10) and (11) we ensure
that the atom 𝑎 holds if it was derived by any rule, by checking whether it was derived in the bag of the tree decomposition that
contains it and is closest to the root (which may be the root). Similarly, the atoms of the form upto𝑟𝑡 for 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 and 𝑟 ∈ Π intuitively
capture whether all the body atoms of 𝑟 that occur in 𝜒(𝑡) or 𝜒(𝑡′ ) for all descendants 𝑡′ of 𝑡 are satisﬁed due to (12). Accordingly,
in (13) and (14) we ensure that forced𝑟 holds iﬀ all the body atoms of 𝑟 are satisﬁed, by checking whether upto𝑟𝑡 holds in the unique
bag 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 such that 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡) and 𝑡 does not have any ancestors that contain 𝑟.
This leads to the following result as desired:
Theorem 16. Given a normal answer set program Π and a tree decomposition  = (𝑇 , 𝜒) of INC(Π) with width 𝑘 and root 𝑡r , the CNF
IClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ) can be constructed in time linear in |Π| + |𝑇 | and satisﬁes that
(i) every model of Clark Prop (Π) can be uniquely extended to a model of IClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ),
(ii) the size of IClark(Π,  ) is in (𝑘|Π|), and
(iii) the treewidth of PRIM(IClark(Π,  , 𝑡r )) is at most 3(𝑘 + 1).
Proof (sketch). Roughly, we construct a new tree decomposition by adding for each node 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 with vertices 𝜒(𝑡) the atoms upto𝑥𝑡
for each 𝑥 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡) and forced𝑟 for 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡). Then, we are interested in the cardinality of the set

(𝜒(𝑡) ⧵ {𝑟 ∣ 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡) ∩ Π}) ∪ {forced𝑟 ∣ 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡) ∩ Π} ∪ {upto𝑥𝑡 ∣ 𝑥 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)},
which is 2(𝑘 + 1). However, this does not cover the clauses in (12) and (9). We can assume w.l.o.g. that every node 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 has at most
2 children (e.g. by introducing duplicates of 𝑡) and add upto𝑥𝑡′ for every child 𝑡′ of 𝑡 to naively achieve an upper bound of 4(𝑘 + 1). By
instead using in the new tree decomposition copies (𝑡, 1), … , (𝑡, |𝜒(𝑡)| + 1) of 𝑡 for each 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 and processing the clauses in (12) and
(9) one by one, we achieve the upper bound of 3(𝑘 + 1). Assuming 𝜒(𝑡) = {𝑥1 , … , 𝑥|𝜒(𝑡)| }, we start with the bag (𝑡, |𝜒(𝑡)| + 1) that
𝑥|𝜒(𝑡)|

contains upto𝑡

, 𝑥, upto𝑥𝑡 , and upto𝑥𝑡 for the children 𝑡1 , 𝑡2 of 𝑡 and all 𝑥 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡). Then, we deﬁne 𝜒 ′ (𝑡, 𝑖) for 𝑖 = 1, … , |𝜒(𝑡)| as
1

2

𝑥
𝑥
𝑥
𝑥
{upto𝑡 𝑖−1 } ∪ 𝜒 ′ (𝑡, 𝑖 + 1) ⧵ {upto𝑡 𝑖 , upto𝑡 𝑖 , upto𝑡 𝑖 }.
1
2

17

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

This means that we start with bag (𝑡, |𝜒(𝑡)| + 1) of size 3(𝑘 + 1) + 1 and decrease the size of the following bags by 2 in each step,
resulting in a width of at most 3(𝑘 + 1). □
Recall that a graph of primal treewidth 𝑘 has incidence treewidth less or equal to 𝑘 + 1. Thus, in the worst case the guarantees
of Theorem 16 only diﬀer from those of Theorem 14 by a constant factor. However, since incidence treewidth may be arbitrarily
smaller than primal treewidth, the guarantees with respect to incidence treewidth can be much better. The latter can also be seen
in Example 11, where we consider a family of programs with constant incidence treewidth but unbounded primal treewidth. Thus,
Theorem 16 broadens the range of cases, where we can fruitfully use CNF-translation followed by algebraic model counting on the
CNF for algebraic answer set counting.
In order to solve AASC with knowledge compilation via a version of Clark’s Completion, we however ﬁrst need to ensure that the
resulting CNF preserves the models of the original program bijectively.
7. Cycle breaking
Recall that Clark’s Completion is only guaranteed to capture the answer sets of a program if the program is acyclic. Thus, for a
program with a cyclic dependency graph, we ﬁrst need to make some further eﬀort to ensure that Clark’s Completion will be correct.
This process is commonly referred to as cycle breaking and transforms a program Π into a program (Π).
There has been a lot of work on cycle breaking both in the ASP community [59,57,55] for translations to SAT as well in the
probabilistic reasoning community [58] speciﬁcally for weighted model counting. The basic idea of cycle breaking is to modify the
program in such a way that afterwards the models of the Clark Completion and the modiﬁed program are the same. In the context of
general AASC, it is moreover important that the answer sets before and after cycle breaking are in a speciﬁc one-to-one relationship.
Formally, the cycle breaking needs to be faithful:
Deﬁnition 17 (Faithfulness). A cycle breaking (.) is faithful (for Π), if:
(i) |(Π)| = |((Π))|, and
(ii) (Π) = { ∩ (Π) ∣  ∈ ((Π))}.
As expected, faithfulness guarantees that we can perform AASC over the program obtained by cycle breaking without changing
the result.
Lemma 18 (Faithfulness Implies Query Invariance). Let 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩ be a measure and let (.) be a faithful cycle breaking for Π. Then,
for 𝜇 ′ = ⟨(Π), 𝛼, ⟩ it holds that 𝜇(𝑎) = 𝜇 ′ (𝑎) for every 𝑎 ∈ (Π).
The translations of Lin and Zhao [59] and Hecher [55] do not satisfy this requirement for all program, as they serve to check the
existence of an answer set.
In contrast, the two cycle breakings of Janhunen and Niemelä [56] and Mantadelis and Janssens [58] are faithful for all programs. In fact, both have been considered in the context of probabilistic reasoning. Janhunen and Niemelä’s was considered for the
implementation of Problog (cf. [36]) and Mantadelis and Janssens’s is still part of the standard Problog implementation.
In this section, our aim is to ﬁnd a cycle breaking that will result in good AASC-performance. As mentioned before, our main
criterion here is whether we can bound the increase of the treewidth. However, of course also the increase in program size and
insights regarding the semantic complexity are relevant for us. In the following, we thus ﬁrst analyze the state of the art of faithful
cycle breakings. Afterwards we introduce a novel cycle breaking called T -Unfolding, which we use in our implementation, and
argue that it has favorable properties.
7.1. Necessity of cycle breaking
Before we consider existing cycle breakings, we ﬁrst motivate the need for it by giving an example program, where the models of
Clark’s Completion do not align with the stable models.
Example 12. Consider again the program Π𝑠𝑚 from the running example.

{st(1)} ←

{st(2)} ←

{st(3)} ←

{inf(3, 1)} ←

{inf(1, 2)} ←

{inf (2, 3)} ←

sm(1) ← st(1)

sm(1) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3)

sm(2) ← st(2)

sm(2) ← inf(1, 2), sm(1)

sm(3) ← st(3)

sm(3) ← inf(2, 3), sm(2)

Recall that {𝑎} ← is a shorthand for the two rules 𝑎 ← not 𝑛𝑎 and 𝑛𝑎 ← not 𝑎. Thus, each of the stress and inﬂuence atoms contribute
the following equivalences to Clark’s Completion, respectively:
18

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

st(𝑖) ↔ ¬nst(𝑖)

ninf(𝑖, 𝑗) ↔ ¬inf(𝑖, 𝑗)

nst(𝑖) ↔ ¬st(𝑖)

inf(𝑖, 𝑗) ↔ ¬ninf(𝑖, 𝑗)

Without any additional constraints, this means that we can choose the truth values of st(𝑖) and inf(𝑖, 𝑗) arbitrarily as long we assign
nst(𝑖) and ninf(𝑖, 𝑗) the negation, respectively. Since this is the intended behavior of choice constraints, we see that Clark’s Completion
works as expected here. On the other hand, for the smokes atoms, we obtain the following equivalences:

sm(𝑖) ↔ st(𝑖) ∨ (inf (𝑗, 𝑖) ∧ sm(𝑗)),
where 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗 mod 3. I.e. 𝑖 smokes iﬀ 𝑖 is stressed or 𝑗 inﬂuences 𝑖 and 𝑗 smokes. Under the stable model semantics, we can only
derive that any person smokes if at least one person is stressed. However, for Clark’s Completion there is a model, where every person
smokes but nobody is stressed, namely:

{sm(1), sm(2), sm(3), nst(1), nst(2), nst(3), inf (3, 1), inf (1, 2), inf (2, 3)}.
While this is also a model of Π𝑠𝑚 it is not stable, since the strict subset

{nst(1), nst(2), nst(3), inf (3, 1), inf (1, 2), inf (2, 3)}
is also a model of Π𝑠𝑚 .
The previous example clearly shows that the problem with Clark’s Completion on general problem is caused by cyclic derivations.
Cyclic derivations are those that use that an atom 𝑎 is true to derive that 𝑎 is true.
7.2. The MJ(.) cycle breaking [58]
The strategy of Mantadelis and Janssens’s [58] cycle breaking MJ(.) to avoid such cyc’lic derivations is to introduce copies 𝑎𝐹 of
an atom 𝑎 for 𝐹 ⊆ (Π) that intuitively capture derivations of 𝑎 that do not positively use any atom from 𝐹 . Then, we can use the
atom 𝑎{𝑏} in a derivation of 𝑏 from 𝑎, even if 𝑎 and 𝑏 are in a cyclic dependency. Naturally, introducing a copy 𝑎𝐹 for every subset
𝐹 ⊆ (Π) is undesirable as it would lead to an exponential number of atoms.
In order to avoid this whenever possible, the cycle breaking MJ(.) makes use of two ideas. Firstly, it uses the fact that sometimes
the derivations for 𝑎 that do not use atoms from 𝐹 or 𝐹 ′ align. Then, it does not make sense to introduce two separate atoms 𝑎𝐹 , 𝑎𝐹 ′
and one can use one of them for both cases. Second, if every derivation for 𝑏 uses the atoms in 𝐹 ⊆ (Π) before using the atom 𝑎,
then no atom 𝑎{𝑏} will be created but only an atom 𝑎𝐹 ∪{𝑏} .
We illustrate the idea behind MJ(.) on our running example.
Example 13 (cont.). First consider the rules for the guesses of the stressed and inﬂuences predicate.

{st(1)} ←

{st(2)} ←

{st(3)} ←

{inf (3, 1)} ←

{inf(1, 2)} ←

{inf(2, 3)} ←

Here, we do not need to change anything, since these atoms are not involved in any cycles. Next, we consider the remaining atoms
in the rules

sm(1) ← st(1)

sm(1) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3)

sm(2) ← st(2)

sm(2) ← inf(1, 2), sm(1)

sm(3) ← st(3)

sm(3) ← inf(2, 3), sm(2)

Here, sm(1), sm(2) and sm(3) are in a cyclic dependency. We ﬁrst consider sm(1). Due to the cycle, we cannot use all derivations of
sm(3) to derive sm(1) using the rule

sm(1) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3).
Instead, we introduce a copy sm(3){sm(1)} of the atom sm(3) that captures all derivations of sm(3) that do not make use of sm(1):

sm(1) ← st(1)

sm(1) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3){sm(1)}

Similarly, in order to capture all derivations of sm(3) from inf (2, 3), sm(2) using the rule

sm(3) ← inf(2, 3), sm(2)
we create a copy sm(2){sm(1),sm(3)} of the atom sm(2) that captures all derivations of sm(2) that use neither sm(1) nor sm(3):

sm(3){sm(1)} ← st(3)

sm(3){sm(1)} ← inf(2, 3), sm(2){sm(1),sm(3)}
19

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Finally, to capture the derivations of sm(2) that captures all derivations of sm(2) that use neither sm(1) nor sm(3) we use the rule

sm(2){sm(1),sm(3)} ← st(2).
Here, we cannot use the rule

sm(2) ← inf(1, 2), sm(1)
since it would make use of sm(1).
The derivations for sm(2) and sm(3) are handled analogously to those of sm(1) using the following rules:

sm(2) ← st(2)
sm(1){sm(2)} ← st(1)

sm(2) ← inf(1, 2), sm(1){sm(2)}
sm(1){sm(2)} ← inf(3, 1), sm(3){sm(2),sm(1)}

sm(3){sm(2),sm(1)} ← st(3)
sm(3) ← st(3)
sm(2){sm(3)} ← st(2)

sm(3) ← inf(2, 3), sm(2){sm(3)}
sm(2){sm(3)} ← inf(1, 2), sm(1){sm(3),sm(2)}

sm(1){sm(3),sm(2)} ← st(1)
Note that here we only used the second idea of Mantadelis and Janssens’s cycle breaking, e.g. by not creating an atom sm(1){sm(3)}
since every derivation of sm(3) that uses sm(1) also uses sm(2). The ﬁrst idea does not apply here, since the derivations for sm(1)
without {sm(2)} and without {sm(3), sm(2)} diﬀer (and similarly for the derivations of sm(2), sm(3)).
This brings us to the question of how the treewidth changes when we apply this cycle breaking. The strategy in Theorem 16 was
intuitively to add every copy of an atom to every bag in a tree decomposition that contains that atom. If we do the same with every
copy 𝑎𝐹 for an atom 𝑎 and 𝐹 ⊆ (Π), we only get an upper-bound that is exponential in the number of atoms of Π. We may do
slightly but not signiﬁcantly better as the following two theorems show.
We ﬁrst recall that a simple cycle in a directed graph 𝐺 is a (directed) path in 𝐺 from a vertex 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) to 𝑣 such that the only
vertex that is visited twice is 𝑣.
Theorem 19. Let Π be a normal answer set program of treewidth 𝑘 such that the largest strongly connected component of DEP(Π) has size
𝑠 and any strongly connected component of DEP (Π) has at most 𝑐 directed simple cycles. Then, the treewidth of MJ(Π) is in (𝑘 ⋅ 𝑠 ⋅ 𝑐).
As in Theorem 16, we add all copies of 𝑎 to every bag that contains atom 𝑎 to obtain the desired result.
Proof. Let (𝑇 , 𝜒) be a tree decomposition of PRIM (Π). Then, (𝑇 , 𝜒 ′ ), where

𝜒 ′ (𝑡) = 𝜒(𝑡) ∪ {𝑎𝐹 ∣ 𝐹 ⊆ (Π), 𝑎𝐹 ∈ (MJ(Π))}
is a tree decomposition of MJ(Π). This follows from the fact that (𝑇 , 𝜒) is a tree decomposition of the original program and since for
every rule

𝑟𝑐 = 𝑎𝐹 ← 𝑏1𝐹1 , … , 𝑏𝑛𝐹𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑚
in MJ(Π) there is a rule

𝑟 = 𝑎 ← 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑚
in Π. From the deﬁnition of 𝜒 ′ it follows that 𝑟𝑐 ∈ 𝜒 ′ (𝑡) iﬀ 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡). Therefore, every rule is contained completely in some bag as
required. □
This upper bound is not very helpful, since the strongly connected components of DEP(Π) can be large and can have exponentially
many directed simple cycles in their size. Unfortunately, we cannot do much better.
Theorem 20. There is a family of programs (Π𝑛 )𝑛∈ℕ such that
1. DEP(Π𝑛 ) has exactly one simple cycle,
2. the treewidth of Π𝑛 is bounded by a constant (independent of 𝑛),
3. the number of atoms and rules of Π𝑛 is linear in 𝑛, and
4. the treewidth of MJ(Π𝑛 ) grows linearly with 𝑛.
20

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Proof (Sketch). We deﬁne a family of programs as follows

Π𝑛 ={{𝑣(𝑖)} ←∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛}∪
{{𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗)} ←∣ 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗

mod 𝑛}∪

{𝑖𝑛(𝑖) ← 𝑣(𝑖) ∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛}∪
{𝑖𝑛(𝑖) ← 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗), 𝑖𝑛(𝑗) ∣ 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗

mod 𝑛}.

Intuitively, Π𝑛 takes the directed graph over 𝑛 vertices with arcs

(1, 2), (2, 3), … , (𝑛 − 1, 𝑛), (𝑛, 1),
thus inducing exactly one cycle 1, 2, … , 𝑛, 1. Then, it guesses a random subset of its vertices (𝑣(𝑖)) and arcs (𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗)). All vertices are
kept such that 𝑣(𝑖) holds or the edge of the predecessor is present 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗) and the vertex 𝑗 was kept. In other words, the latter means
that all vertices on maximal paths of guessed edges, whose starting vertex was guessed are also kept.
1.-3. can be easily veriﬁed. To show 4., we show that PRIM(MJ(Π𝑛 )) has a graph minor such that every vertex has at least
degree 𝑛. From this it follows that the treewidth of PRIM(MJ(Π𝑛 )) is at least 𝑛 by employing standard results from the treewidth
literature [94,73]. □
We see that the cycle breaking MJ(.) does not have desirable properties when it comes to treewidth.
7.3. The JN(.) cycle breaking [56]
We continue with the second cycle breaking JN(.) due to Janhunen and Niemelä [56]. The previous strategy was to capture partial
derivations explicitly by introducing auxiliary atoms leading to an acyclic and answer set preserving program. The cycle breaking
JN(.) introduced in this work instead leaves the original program untouched but adds constraints that ensure each true atom can be
derived. For this, it makes use of level rankings [95]. Intuitively, the levels of atoms specify in which order they can be used in a
derivation, i.e. when the level of atom 𝑎 is lower than that of atom 𝑏, then we can use a rule that has 𝑏 in the head and 𝑎 in the body
to derive 𝑏. It was shown that it is possible to characterize the answer sets of a program in terms of Clark’s Completion in combination
with level ranking constraints. Furthermore, by adding constraints on the level ranking we obtain a one-to-one correspondence [95].
We illustrate the idea behind JN (.) on our running example and refer the interested reader to [56] for details.
Example 14 (cont.). As already mentioned, we keep the original set of rules untouched. That is JN(Π) = Π ∪ Π′ , where Π′ contains
additional rules that specify level ranking constraints.
The level ranking constraints for Π𝑠𝑚 are as follows. As before, the guesses of the stressed and inﬂuences predicates do not require
additional rules. More generally, atoms 𝑎 that can only be derived from rules whose positive body atoms are not in a cycle with 𝑎 do
not require level ranking constraints.
Thus, we only need to take care of the following rules:

sm(1) ← st(1)

sm(1) ← inf (3, 1), sm(3)

sm(2) ← st(2)

sm(2) ← inf (1, 2), sm(1)

sm(3) ← st(3)

sm(3) ← inf (2, 3), sm(2)

For sm(1), this leads to the following additional rules:

𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(sm(1)) ← st(1)

(15)

𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(sm(1)) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3), 𝐥𝐭(sm(3), sm(1))

(16)

← sm(1), not 𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(sm(1))

(17)

𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(sm(1)) ← st(1)

(18)

𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(sm(1)) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3), 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(sm(3), sm(1))

(19)

← sm(1), not 𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(sm(1))

(20)

Here, we introduce the following new atoms in order to model the level ranking constraints:
• 𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(sm(1)) means that sm(1) is justiﬁed, i.e. there is a rule that is applicable also when taking into account level rankings.
• 𝐥𝐭(sm(3), sm(1)) means that sm(3) is at a lower level than sm(1). In this case sm(3) can be used in a derivation of sm(1).
• 𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(sm(1)) means that sm(1) is at the next level compared to some atom that is used to derive it. i.e. there is a rule with sm(1)
in the head and an atom in the body that is exactly one level lower than that of sm(1). E.g., in (19) we derive 𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(sm(1)) when
we can derive sm(1) from inf (3, 1) and sm(3) and the level of sm(1) is equal to 1 plus the level of sm(3).
21

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

• 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(sm(3), sm(1)) means that the level of sm(3) is exactly one level lower than the level of sm(1).
The atoms of the form 𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(𝑎) and 𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(𝑎) are deﬁned by the given rules. For the other auxiliary atoms of the form 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(𝑏, 𝑎) and
𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎) we still need to add deﬁnitions based on the levels associated with the atoms 𝑎 and 𝑏. To model the level of an atom 𝑎, we use
atoms that act as a binary counter that represents the level. i.e. if the SCC of the dependency graph of the program that contains 𝑎 has
size 𝑛, we introduce atoms 𝐛𝐢𝐧(𝑎, 𝑖) that are guessed via rules {𝐛𝐢𝐧(𝑎, 𝑖)} ← for 𝑖 = 0, … , ⌈log2 (𝑛)⌉. Then, for a given interpretation 
of these atoms the level of 𝑎 is given by
⌈log2 (𝑛)⌉ { 𝑖
∑
2
𝑖=0

0

if 𝐛𝐢𝐧(𝑎, 𝑖) ∈ ,
otherwise.

Using this correspondence, we can deﬁne the atoms 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(𝑏, 𝑎) and 𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎) in terms of the binary counter atoms of 𝑎 and 𝑏. Note that
in order to obtain a faithful translation, we additionally need to ensure that the level of atoms is minimal, as otherwise it is not
unique. For details, we refer to the original paper [56].
This brings us to the question of treewidth guarantees that we can give for JN(Π). In contrast to MJ(Π), we do not need
information about the number of simple cycles for this.
Theorem 21. Let Π be a normal answer set program of treewidth 𝑘 such that the largest strongly connected component of DEP(Π) has size
𝑠. Then, the treewidth of JN(Π) is in (𝑘2 + 𝑘 log2 (𝑠)).
As with Theorem 16 the idea here is to take an existing tree decomposition of optimal width 𝑘 and add to each bag all auxiliary
atoms that are related to the atoms in the bag.
We point out that the quadratic dependency on the treewidth 𝑘 can actually be avoided by modifying Janhunen and Niemelä’s
deﬁnition of cycle breaking. For this, observe that the quadratic dependency stems from the inclusion of 𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎) and 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(𝑏, 𝑎) for
every 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡) in the new bag 𝜒 ′ (𝑡). If we instead deﬁne one atom 𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎, 𝑟) and 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(𝑏, 𝑎, 𝑟) per rule 𝑟 such that ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑(𝑟) = 𝑎 and
𝑏 ∈ 𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦(𝑟), we do not need to include all such atoms in the same bag but can handle them in diﬀerent bags. It follows that there is
a cycle breaking with a treewidth upper bound in (𝑘 log2 (𝑠)). In fact, we observed that the implementation of JN(.) in LP 2 LP 2 does
exactly this, meaning that it comes with a treewidth upper bound of (𝑘 log2 (𝑠)).
We see that JN(.) gives better guarantees than MJ(.), since 𝑘 log2 (𝑠) grows slower asymptotically than 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑠 ⋅ 𝑐 even when 𝑐 = 1.
However, it uses a binary counter for the encoding of the level ranking. While this provides very good asymptotic size guarantees,
both in terms of the resulting program and its treewidth, binary encodings can sometimes have negative eﬀects on the practical
performance of SAT solvers [96] and can result in much slower performance than encodings of a larger asymptotic size.
7.4. T -unfolding
We have seen that the current cycle breakings either come with weak upper bounds on the treewidth or have good upper bounds
but use an encoding that can lead to impairments of the practical performance of SAT solvers and therefore also of knowledge
compilers.
We want to avoid both drawbacks as far as possible. For this, we take a closer look at dependency graphs of programs and
introduce cbs(𝐺) a novel parameter, the component-boosted backdoor size of a digraph. Intuitively, cbs(.) (deﬁned later in Deﬁnition 27)
provides a more ﬁne grained measure of directed cyclicity. More importantly, we can exploit it in T -Unfolding, our new cycle
breaking, which leads to the following guarantees:
Theorem 22. For any factorized measure 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩, we can construct in polynomial time in the size of Π given access to an NP-oracle
a factorized measure 𝜇 ′ = ⟨Π′ , 𝛼, ⟩ with an acyclic program Π′ such that
(i) for all 𝑎 ∈ (Π) it holds that 𝜇(𝑎) = 𝜇 ′ (𝑎),
(ii) the treewidth of Π′ is at most 𝑘 ⋅ cbs(DEP(Π)), where 𝑘 is the treewidth of Π, and
(iii) the size of Π′ is at most cbs(DEP(Π)) ⋅ |Π|.
Here, the increase of the treewidth and the program is bounded by cbs(DEP(Π)). Thus, this factor only depends on the dependency
graph of Π and its cyclicity, rather than the number of atoms in the program or the size of the largest SCC of cbs(DEP(Π)).
As the name says, T -Unfolding is related to another approach for AASC called T -compilation [39]. Intuitively, the idea of
T -compilation is to capture the derivations of atoms by iteratively compiling SDDs that are increasingly precise approximations
thereof. For this, we take at each step all rules 𝑟1 , … , 𝑟𝑚 in Π such that ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑(𝑟𝑖 ) = 𝑎 for some atom 𝑎 ∈ (Π). Then, we ﬁrst conjoin
the SDDs that represent the derivations of the body atoms of each rule 𝑟𝑖 . By disjoining the resulting SDDs for each rule 𝑟𝑖 , we get a
better approximation of the derivations of 𝑎.
We use a similar idea to iteratively capture increasingly more derivations of atoms, but in a diﬀerent way. Namely, we introduce
at each step a new atom 𝑎(𝑖) that represents the set of derivations of 𝑎 that are currently captured. Intuitively, these new atoms 𝑎(𝑖) are
22

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Algorithm 1 T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠).
Input A program Π and an unfolding sequence 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ .
Output An acyclic program Π′ .
1: last = {𝑎 ↦ ⊥ ∣ 𝑎 ∈ (Π)}
2: cnt = {𝑎 ↦ 0 ∣ 𝑎 ∈ (Π)}
3: Π′ = {𝑟 ∈ Π, 𝐻(𝑟) = ⊥}
4: for 𝑖 = 1, … , len(𝑠) do
5:
if IS L AST O CCURRENCE (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑖, 𝑠) then
6:
head = 𝑠𝑖
7:
else
cnt(𝑠 )+1
8:
head = 𝑠𝑖 𝑖
9:
10:
11:

for 𝑟 ∈ Π, 𝑠𝑖 = 𝐻(𝑟) do
+ = {last(𝑏) ∣ 𝑏 ∈ 𝐵 + (𝑟)}
𝐵𝑛𝑒𝑤
+ , 𝐵 − (𝑟)}
Π′ = Π′ ∪ {head ← 𝐵𝑛𝑒𝑤

12:
13:

last(𝑠𝑖 ) = head
cnt(𝑠𝑖 ) = cnt(𝑠𝑖 ) + 1

14: return Π′

similar to the atoms 𝑎𝐹 introduced by Mantadelis and Janssens’s cycle breaking, since both capture a subset of the derivations of 𝑎.
However, the captured subsets of derivations are diﬀerent, which allows us to obtain better theoretical guarantees for T -Unfolding.
T -Unfolding, which takes as input a program Π and an unfolding sequence 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ , which is a list of atoms 𝑠1 … 𝑠𝑛 , with
𝑠𝑖 ∈ (Π), is described in Algorithm 1. Intuitively, where the immediate consequence operator T [97] checks if an atom 𝑎 follows
from previously derived atoms, T -Unfolding introduces copies of all rules that derive 𝑎 from previously considered atoms. For this,
we iterate over the unfolding sequence 𝑠 = 𝑠1 … 𝑠𝑛 , considering 𝑠𝑖 at the 𝑖th step (line 4). As the head atom of the rule-copies we
𝑐𝑛𝑡(𝑠 )+1

introduce a new copy 𝑠𝑖 𝑖
or take the original atom 𝑠𝑖 depending on whether 𝑠𝑖 occurs again in 𝑠𝑖+1 … 𝑠𝑛 (see lines 5-8). The
positive body atoms are replaced by the last copy made of them (line 10) and the negative atoms in 𝐵 − (𝑟) are left as they are. After
copying all rules with 𝑠𝑖 in the head, we update the last copy of 𝑠𝑖 and increase the counter storing the number of copies (lines 12,
13).
We consider the eﬀect of T -Unfolding on the program from our running example.
Example 15 (cont’d). First, recall that choice constraints {𝑎} ← are a shorthand for 𝑎 ← not 𝑛𝑎 and 𝑛𝑎 ← not 𝑎. We compute T U NFOLD (Π𝑠𝑚 , 𝑠) using the unfolding sequence

𝑠 = 𝑠𝑔𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑠
𝑠𝑔𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑠 = st(1)nst(1) … st(3)nst(3)inf(3, 1)ninf (3, 1) … inf (2, 3)ninf (2, 3)
𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑠 = sm(1)sm(2)sm(3)sm(1)sm(2)
and obtain:

{st(1)} ←

{st(2)} ←

{st(3)} ←

{inf (3, 1)} ←

{inf(1, 2)} ←

{inf (2, 3)} ←

sm(1)1 ← st(1)

sm(1)1 ← inf(3, 1), ⊥

sm(2)1 ← st(2)

sm(2)1 ← inf(1, 2), sm(1)1

sm(3) ← st(3)

sm(3) ← inf(2, 3), sm(2)1

sm(1) ← st(1)

sm(1) ← inf(3, 1), sm(3)

sm(2) ← st(2)

sm(2) ← inf(1, 2), sm(1)

We observe that T -U NFOLD (., 𝑠) is faithful for Π𝑠𝑚 .
The output of T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠) is always an acyclic program, however, the faithfulness for Π depends on 𝑠. To ensure that T U NFOLD (., 𝑠) is faithful, it is enough to iterate over all variables 𝑛 = |(Π)| + 1 times, since every derivation in Π can only take 𝑛 steps.
However, as we have seen in the previous example, it can be suﬃcient to use much fewer steps. This is because the number of times
a variable needs to be considered in an unfolding sequence depends on the positive dependencies involving it: e.g. st(𝑖), 𝑖 = 1, … , 3
does not positively depend on any variable and can thus be considered once before all other variables and never again afterwards.
We give a suﬃcient condition for faithfulness. Notably, our condition abstracts away the actual program Π and is based on a
structural property of the digraph unfolding of DEP(Π).
Deﬁnition 23 (Digraph Unfolding). Let 𝐺 be a digraph and let 𝑠 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺)∗ be an unfolding sequence. Let cnt(𝑎, 𝑠) = |{𝑗 ∣ 𝑠𝑗 = 𝑎}| be
the number of occurrences of 𝑎 in the unfolding sequence 𝑠, then the unfolding UF(𝐺, 𝑠) of 𝐺 with respect to 𝑠 is the digraph 𝑈 such
that
23

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

st(1)

st(2)

st(3)

sm(1)1

sm(1)

sm(2)1

sm(3)

inf(1, 2)

inf(2, 3)

sm(2)

inf(3, 1)

Fig. 5. Dependency Graph of T -U NFOLD (Π𝑠𝑚 , 𝑠).

(i) 𝑉 (𝑈 ) = {𝑎𝑖 ∣ 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ cnt(𝑎, 𝑠) }, and
(ii) (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸(𝑈 ) if (𝑏, 𝑎) ∈ 𝐸(𝐺), cnt(𝑎, 𝑠1 … 𝑠𝑘 ) = 𝑗 for some 𝑘 and cnt(𝑏, 𝑠1 … 𝑠𝑘 ) = 𝑖 > 0.
The idea is that the digraph unfolding of DEP(Π) with respect to 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ is the dependency graph of the unfolded program
T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠). Therefore, the vertices are the copies of the atoms (see lines 6,8) and there is an edge (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑗 ) if 𝑏𝑖 is the last copy
of an atom that is used to derive 𝑎𝑗 , i.e. the 𝑗 -th occurrence of 𝑎 in 𝑠 (see lines 10,11). Formally:
Lemma 24. Let Π be an answer set program and 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ be an unfolding sequence. Then, UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠) = DEP(T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠))
(when identifying 𝑎 with 𝑎cnt(𝑎,𝑠) ).
Example 16 (cont’d). The dependency graph of T -U NFOLD (Π𝑠𝑚 , 𝑠) is given in Fig. 5. It is acyclic and corresponds to UF(DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 ), 𝑠)
as expected.
Using Lemma 24, we can provide a suﬃcient condition for faithfulness.
Theorem 25. Let Π be an answer set program and 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ be an unfolding sequence. If for every simple directed path 𝜋 = (𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑛 ) in
𝑐
𝑐
DEP(Π) some directed path 𝜋𝑐 = (𝑎11 , … , 𝑎𝑛𝑛 ) in UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠) exists, then T -U NFOLD (., 𝑠) is faithful for Π.
Proof (sketch). Let Π be some answer set program and let 𝑠 be an unfolding sequence that satisﬁes the precondition of the
theorem. Consider  ⊆ (Π). For any interpretation 𝑒𝑥𝑡 of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) such that 𝑒𝑥𝑡 ∩ (Π) =  , it holds that the reduct
T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠)𝑒𝑥𝑡 is equal to T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) because the rules that are added in line 12 use the original negative body 𝐵 − (𝑟),
which only uses atoms from (Π). Therefore, we can consider T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) , which has a unique minimal model. We see that
if there is an answer set 𝑒𝑥𝑡 of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) that is equal to  on (Π), then it is the only such answer set.
By the same argument, we see that taking the reduct w.r.t.  and T -Unfolding commute: T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) = T -U NFOLD(Π , 𝑠).
Since  is an answer set iﬀ it is a minimal model of the reduct Π , it remains to show that 𝑎 ∈ (Π) is derivable from Π iﬀ it is
derivable from T -U NFOLD(Π , 𝑠). Since both programs are positive, 𝑎 is derivable iﬀ it has an SLD tree. However, we know that 𝑠
preserves all simple paths and since the paths in every SLD tree correspond to paths in DEP(Π), we know there exists a corresponding
SLD-tree in T -U NFOLD(Π , 𝑠). □
Note that we can prove a similar result for T -compilation, which reaches a ﬁxed point iﬀ T -U NFOLD (., 𝑠) is faithful for Π.
This theorem gives us a suﬃcient condition for an unfolding sequence 𝑠 to lead to faithfulness of T -U NFOLD (., 𝑠) with respect to
a program Π. Notably, the condition does not depend on the actual program itself but only on its dependency graph and its unfolding
with respect to 𝑠.
We are not only interested in faithfulness but we also care about the treewidth increase caused by unfolding. We can bound this
increase as follows:
Lemma 26. Let Π be an answer set program with treewidth 𝑘 and 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ be an unfolding sequence. If every variable 𝑎 ∈ (Π) occurs
at most 𝑚 times in 𝑠, then the treewidth of T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠) is less or equal to 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑚.
Proof (sketch). We know that during unfolding we introduce at most 𝑚 − 1 copies 𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑚−1 of a variable 𝑎 ∈ (Π). Now, let
(𝑇 , 𝜒) be a tree decomposition for PRIM(Π) of width 𝑘. Then, (𝑇 , 𝜒 ′ ), where

𝜒 ′ (𝑡) = 𝜒(𝑡) ∪ {𝑎𝑗 ∣ 1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑚 − 1, 𝑎 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)}
is a tree decomposition of T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠), and |𝜒 ′ (𝑡)| ≤ |𝜒(𝑡)| ⋅ 𝑚 ≤ 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑚.
24

□

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

We remark that the converse of this Lemma does not hold.
There is another relevant observation that we need to keep in mind when it comes to knowledge compilation later on. While the
guarantee generally only gives us an exponential upper bound in terms of treewidth, we actually know that this upper bound is too
pessimistic. Consider the following scenario: if we introduce 𝑚 copies 𝑎, 𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑚−1 of a variable 𝑎 using T -Unfolding, then we
have a monotonic relation between the truth values of the copies. That is, if 𝑎𝑖 is true in a stable model  of the program and 𝑗 > 𝑖,
then also 𝑎𝑗 must be true in  . Thus, restricted to the variables 𝑎, 𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑚−1 , there are actually at most 𝑚 diﬀerent assignments that
can be extended to a stable model. It follows that for the variables in a bag 𝜒 ′ (𝑡) of the tree decomposition that we constructed in
the proof of Lemma 26 only 𝑚𝑘 = 2𝑘⋅log2 (𝑚) diﬀerent assignments can be extended to a stable model. We thus believe that knowledge
compilation has better performance than Theorem 36 guarantees.
Motivated by Lemma 26 and Theorem 25, we say that an unfolding sequence 𝑠 is a path-preserving 𝑚-unfolding sequence (for
𝑐
𝑐
digraph 𝐺 ), if for every simple (directed) path 𝜋 = (𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑛 ) in 𝐺 there is a (directed) path 𝜋𝑐 = (𝑎11 , … , 𝑎𝑛𝑛 ) in UF(𝐺, 𝑠) and every
variable 𝑎 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) occurs at most 𝑚 times in 𝑠. Naturally, we are interested in path-preserving 𝑚-unfolding sequences for small 𝑚.
Since also Lemma 26 does not access the actual program itself but only its dependency graph and the unfolding sequence, we can
abstract away the program and search for path-preserving 𝑚 unfolding sequences on digraphs directly. As we do not want to do a
blind search, we instead consider backdoors [60] and generalize them to component-boosted backdoors into acyclicity because we can
give guarantees for the maximum necessary 𝑚 based on them. Backdoors have already been considered in the context of ASP [60].
Usually, the notion of a backdoor for a digraph 𝐺 is a vertex set 𝑆 , such that 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 satisﬁes some desirable property. For us this
property is (directed or undirected) acyclicity of 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 , since we can ﬁnd a suitable unfolding sequence when given 𝑆 in either case.
Both the backdoor size of a digraph and its generalization to component-boosted backdoor size intuitively measure the cyclicity
of the given digraph by asking how many vertices need to be “cut out” in order for the remaining digraph to be (almost) acyclic.
When a parameter value is low, an unfolding sequence 𝑠 exists such that T -U NFOLD (., 𝑠) is faithful and every variable occurs only
a few times in 𝑠.
Deﬁnition 27 (Backdoor, Component-boosted Backdoor). Let 𝐺 be a digraph. Then, bs(𝐺), the backdoor size of 𝐺 is

min{|𝑆| ∣ 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺), 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is a polyforest or acyclic},
where a polyforest is graph that has no undirected cycles.
Furthermore, cbs(𝐺), the component-boosted backdoor size of 𝐺 , is
(i) 1, if 𝐺 is acyclic (which includes 𝑉 (𝐺) = ∅),
(ii) 2, if 𝐺 is a polytree, i.e. a connected polyforest,
(iii) max{cbs(𝐶) ∣ 𝐶 ∈ SCC(𝐺)}, if 𝐺 is cyclic but not strongly connected,
(iv) min{cbs(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆) ⋅ (|𝑆| + 1) ∣ 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺), 𝑆 ≠ ∅} otherwise.
As the name suggests, 𝑐𝑏𝑠 adds component-boosting to a speciﬁc variant of backdoors. A related parameter is elimination distance [98]. However, for elimination distance the removal set 𝑆 in (iv) may only contain 1 element and results in cost cbs(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆) + 1.
Thus, the elimination distance to acyclic digraphs and polytrees is bounded iﬀ cbs(.) is bounded, but naïvely, we can only assert that
if the elimination distance is 𝑘 then cbs(.) is less or equal to 2𝑘 .
The main diﬀerence compared to the backdoor size is that component-boosted backdoor size additionally takes into account that
𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 may consist of separate SCCs that can be handled recursively. We can therefore bound cbs(.) in terms of bs(.) as follows:
Lemma 28. Let 𝐺 be a digraph. Then, cbs(𝐺) ≤ 2 ⋅ (bs(𝐺) + 1).
Proof. If 𝐺 is acyclic, then

cbs(𝐺) = 1 ≤ 2 = 2 ⋅ (0 + 1).
If 𝐺 is a polytree, then

cbs(𝐺) = 2 ≤ 2 = 2 ⋅ (0 + 1).
If 𝐺 is cyclic and strongly connected, let 𝑆 ∗ be a set of vertices such that |𝑆 ∗ | = bs(𝐺) and 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 ∗ is a polyforest or acyclic. Then

cbs(𝐺) = min{cbs(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆) ⋅ (|𝑆| + 1) ∣ 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺), 𝑆 ≠ ∅}
≤ cbs(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 ∗ ) ⋅ (|𝑆 ∗ | + 1)
≤ 2 ⋅ (bs(𝐺) + 1).
If 𝐺 is cyclic but not strongly connected, then

cbs(𝐺) = max{cbs(𝐶) ∣ 𝐶 ∈ SCC(𝐺)}.
25

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

𝑣15

𝑣14

𝑣13

𝑣12
𝑣1

𝑣11

𝑣3

𝑣2

𝑣21
𝑣23

𝑣22
𝑣4

𝑣5

𝑣24

𝑣25

Fig. 6. A polytree 𝐺 with root 𝑣1 (left) and the unfolding UF(𝐺, 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒 ), where 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑣4 𝑣5 𝑣2 𝑣3 𝑣1 , 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒 = 𝑣1 𝑣3 𝑣2 𝑣5 𝑣4 (right).

Let 𝑆 ∗ be a set of vertices such that |𝑆 ∗ | = bs(𝐺) and 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 ∗ is a polyforest or acyclic. For each 𝐶 ∈ SCC(𝐺) it holds that 𝐶 ⧵ 𝑆 ∗ is
a polyforest of acyclic, thus bs(𝐶) ≤ 𝑏𝑠𝐺 . From the fact that each 𝐶 is either acyclic, a polytree, or cyclic and strongly connected, it
follows by the previous three cases that cbs(𝐶) ≤ 2 ⋅ (bs(𝐶) + 1) ≤ 2 ⋅ (bs(𝐺) + 1). □
Example 17 (cont’d). Consider the dependency graph DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 ) in Fig. 11a. It is strongly connected and not a polytree, therefore
cbs(DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 )) is given by case (iv)

min{cbs(DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 ) ⧵ 𝑆)(|𝑆| + 1) ∣ 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 )), 𝑆 ≠ ∅}.
We see that if we take away any 𝑆𝑖 = {sm(𝑖)}, 𝑖 = 1, … , 3, then DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 ) ⧵ 𝑆𝑖 is acyclic. It follows that cbs(DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 )) ≤
cbs(DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 ) ⧵ 𝑆𝑖 ) ⋅ (|𝑆𝑖 | + 1) = 2. Since we need to remove at least one element, this is also a lower bound and hence
cbs(DEP(Π𝑠𝑚 )) = 2.
In this example the upper bound given by the backdoor size and component-boosted backdoor size align. However, for larger,
more complex graphs 𝑐𝑏𝑠(.) can be much smaller than the upper bound guaranteed by backdoor size.
With the deﬁnition of the component-boosted backdoor size in mind, we state the main result of this section.
Theorem 22. For any factorized measure 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩, we can construct in polynomial time in the size of Π given access to an NP-oracle
a factorized measure 𝜇 ′ = ⟨Π′ , 𝛼, ⟩ with an acyclic program Π′ such that
(i) for all 𝑎 ∈ (Π) it holds that 𝜇(𝑎) = 𝜇 ′ (𝑎),
(ii) the treewidth of Π′ is at most 𝑘 ⋅ cbs(DEP(Π)), where 𝑘 is the treewidth of Π, and
(iii) the size of Π′ is at most cbs(DEP(Π)) ⋅ |Π|.
Of course it is somewhat undesirable that we need access to an NP-oracle for the construction. However, this is unavoidable,
since computing cbs(.) is NP-hard.
Theorem 29. The problem of checking whether cbs(𝐺) ≤ 𝑘 given a digraph 𝐺 and 𝑘 ∈ ℕ in the input is NP-complete.
Proof (Sketch). NP-membership is easy to see by a guess and check algorithm.
For NP-hardness, we use a reduction from SAT by constructing a digraph 𝐺 such that its backdoor size is 𝑘 iﬀ the SAT instance
is solvable. Then, we modify the digraph in such a manner that backdoor size and component-boosted backdoor size are equal to
obtain the desired result. □
We will see later on that luckily the NP-hardness does not cause any problems in practice.
To prove Theorem 22, we show that every digraph 𝐺 has some path-preserving cbs(𝐺)-unfolding sequence, using structural
induction on the deﬁnition of cbs(.).
Lemma 30. Let 𝐺 be an acyclic digraph. Then, there exists a path-preserving 1-unfolding sequence. For case (i), we obtain:
Proof. Let 𝑠 be an unfolding sequence where every 𝑎 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) occurs exactly once and which obeys a topological ordering of 𝐺 .
Then, UF(𝐺, 𝑠) is equal to 𝐺 (modulo variable renaming) and therefore path-preserving. □
Next, we consider case (ii), where 𝐺 is a polytree.
Lemma 31. For every polytree 𝐺 there exists a path-preserving 2-unfolding sequence 𝑠.
26

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

𝑎1

…

𝑆

…

𝑎|𝑆|
𝑆
𝜋|𝑆|

𝜋|𝑆|+1

UF(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆, 𝑠𝑟 )

UF(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆, 𝑠𝑟 )

𝜋1
UF(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆, 𝑠𝑟 )

…

Fig. 7. Sketch of UF(𝐺, 𝑠) and a path 𝜋 through it, for the second recursive case, as in the proof of Lemma 33.

Proof. As 𝐺 is a polytree, the corresponding undirected graph 𝐺𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒 is a tree with some arbitrarily chosen root. Let 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 , 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺)∗
be sequences such that every vertex occurs in 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 and 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒 after all its descendants and ancestors in 𝐺𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒 , respectively. Then, the
concatenation 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒 of 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 and 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒 , is a path-preserving 2-unfolding sequence of 𝐺 , as depicted in Fig. 6. □
In case (iii), which is the ﬁrst recursive one, we assume that 𝐺 is cyclic but not strongly connected. Here, we divide the problem
into one subproblem for each SCC of 𝐺 and obtain a global solution by combining the solutions for the subproblems.
Lemma 32. Let 𝐺 be a cyclic but not strongly connected digraph, and for each 𝐶 ∈ SCC(𝐺) let 𝑠𝐶 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐶)∗ be a path-preserving cbs(𝐶)unfolding sequence for 𝐶 . Then, some path-preserving cbs(𝐺) = max𝐶∈SCC(𝐺) cbs(𝐶)-unfolding sequence for 𝐺 exists.
Proof. Let 𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑛 be the condensation of 𝐺 , i.e. 𝑉 (𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑛 ) = SCC(𝐺) and (𝐶, 𝐶 ′ ) ∈ 𝐸(𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑛 ) if there exist 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐶), 𝑣′ ∈ 𝑉 (𝐶 ′ ) such that
(𝑣, 𝑣′ ) ∈ 𝐸(𝐺). Since 𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑛 is acyclic we can assume a topological order (𝐶1 , … , 𝐶𝑛 ) of 𝐺𝑐𝑜𝑛 to be given. Consider, 𝑠 = 𝑠𝐶1 … 𝑠𝐶𝑛 , the
concatenation of the unfolding sequences for the SCCs in the chosen topological order. It is a path-preserving unfolding sequence
for 𝐺 since for every directed simple path in 𝐺 that contains 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) it holds that if 𝑎 ∈ 𝐶𝑖 and 𝑏 ∈ 𝐶𝑗 such that 𝑖 < 𝑗 , then 𝑎
must occur after 𝑏. Therefore, as the sequences 𝑠𝐶𝑖 per component are path-preserving, we know that the whole sequence is pathpreserving. Furthermore, since 𝑉 (𝐶𝑖 ) ∩ 𝑉 (𝐶𝑗 ) = ∅ for 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 and 𝑠𝐶𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐶𝑖 )∗ , it is clear that the maximum number of times a vertex
𝑎 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺) occurs in 𝑠 is bounded by max𝐶∈SCC(𝐺) cbs(𝐶) = cbs(𝐺). □
Last but not least, we consider case (iv), the second recursive case. Here, 𝐺 is strongly connected but not a polytree. We remove
a set 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺) of “problematic” vertices such that the component-boosted backdoor size of the rest, i.e. cbs(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆), is small and
handle 𝑆 and 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 separately.
Lemma 33. Let 𝐺 be a strongly connected digraph, 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺) and 𝑠𝑟 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆)∗ a path-preserving 𝑚𝑟 -unfolding sequence. Then, there
exists a path-preserving 𝑚𝑟 (|𝑆| + 1)-unfolding sequence for 𝐺 .
Proof. Let 𝑆 = {𝑎1 , … , 𝑎|𝑆| }. We deﬁne 𝑠𝑆 = 𝑎1 … 𝑎|𝑆| and 𝑠 = (𝑠𝑟 𝑠𝑆 )|𝑆| 𝑠𝑟 , i.e. 𝑠 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺)∗ is the sequence obtained by iterating |𝑆|
times over the sequence 𝑠𝑟 𝑠𝑆 and ﬁnally concatenating 𝑠𝑟 . Then, 𝑠 is an 𝑚𝑟 (|𝑆| + 1)-unfolding sequence, as every 𝑎 ∈ 𝑆 occurs exactly
|𝑆| ≤ 𝑚𝑟 (|𝑆| + 1) times, and every 𝑎 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆) occurs at most 𝑚𝑟 times in 𝑠𝑟 and at most 𝑚𝑟 (|𝑆| + 1) times in general.
Furthermore, 𝑠 is path-preserving: every simple directed path 𝜋 in 𝐺 uses 𝑘 ≤ |𝑆| vertices from 𝑆 and thus 𝜋 = 𝜋1 , 𝑎𝑖1 , 𝜋2 , 𝑎𝑖2 , … ,
𝑎𝑖𝑘 , 𝜋𝑘 , where 𝜋𝑖 is a simple directed path in 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 . Consider Fig. 7, which sketches UF(𝐺, 𝑠) and the path 𝜋 . As 𝑠𝑟 is path-preserving
for 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 , we know that we can walk 𝜋1 in UF(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆, 𝑠𝑟 ), then go to 𝑎1 ∈ 𝑆 , walk the path 𝜋2 in UF(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆, 𝑠𝑟 ) and so on. □
8. Implementation
In the previous sections, we discussed the general pipeline for solving AASC problems, and we considered for diﬀerent aspects
such as the knowledge compilation, the cycle breaking and the Clark Completion which options are available and which theoretical
guarantees we can give for them. In the following, these theoretical considerations will serve as a basis for the choices we make
when implementing our approach to solving AASC problems in our open-source solver aspmc.4
As other available solvers, aspmc follows the general pipeline given in Fig. 3. In contrast to some of them, aspmc does not skip
any of its steps. In the following, we discuss the implementation aspects of each of the steps both technically and in relation to the
theoretical results discussed above.
8.1. Input speciﬁcation
For the inputs we do not allow general algebraic measures but restrict ourselves to the fragment of programs that can be speciﬁed
similarly to ProbLog syntax. From an implementation perspective, it would also be easily possible to accept algebraic measures
in their general form, however we did not deem this necessary, since Theorem 7 shows that this is not a restriction in terms of

4
aspmc can be installed as a python package from https://pypi.org/project/aspmc/ for easy use and its source code can be downloaded from https://github.com/
raki123/aspmc/ for development purposes.

27

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

expressivity. We chose this syntax, since it already well-known from ProbLog and allows ProbLog, aspmc, and PITA to be used
interchangeably.
More formally, we allow programs consisting of rules that are either standard normal ASP rules, or rules of the form

𝑟1 ∶∶ 𝑎1 ; … ; 𝑟𝑘 ∶∶ 𝑎𝑘 ∶ ∓ 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑚 .

(21)

Here, 𝑟1 , … , 𝑟𝑘 are semiring values over the speciﬁed semiring and all 𝑎𝑖 , 𝑏𝑗 , and 𝑐𝑙 are atoms. By default, the probabilistic semiring
 is assumed, other semirings can be given as an input argument, specifying either one of the standard semirings that is included in
aspmc or a non-standard semiring that is speciﬁed as a python module, which is dynamically loaded based in its name.
A rule of the form (21) speciﬁes that if the body is satisﬁed, then we can derive up to one of the atoms 𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑘 . If we use the
rule to derive 𝑎𝑖 , then the rule contributes a factor of 𝑟𝑖 to the weight of the model. If the body of the rule is satisﬁed but none of the
atoms 𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑘 are derived by it, then the rule contributes a factor of negate(𝑟1 ⊕ … ⊕𝑟𝑘 ) to the weight of the model. Here, negate
is a function deﬁned by the semiring module. E.g., for the probabilistic semiring it makes sense to deﬁne negate(𝑝) as 1 − 𝑝 in order
to ensure that the overall probability mass deﬁned by a program is 1. Another generally applicable option is to specify negate(𝑟) as
𝑒⊕ to ensure that exactly one of the 𝑎𝑖 is derived if the body of the rule is satisﬁed, since otherwise the weight of the corresponding
model is zero.
Furthermore, atom queries are speciﬁed immediately within the program via statements of the form

𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦(𝑎),
for an atom 𝑎. A program can contain multiple such statements, which then are each evaluated as the weight of all answer sets such
that 𝑎 holds.
We want to stress that the rule only contributes a factor 𝑟𝑖 , if it was used to derive 𝑎𝑖 , rather than if its body is satisﬁed and 𝑎𝑖 is
true. This has important implications, such as the following:
Example 18 (Two Possible Derivations). Consider the following program over the probability semiring  :

0.5 ∶∶ 𝑎.

0.5 ∶∶ 𝑎.

𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦(𝑎).

This program speciﬁes that there are two independent ways to derive 𝑎 and we are interested in the weight of the answer sets such
that 𝑎 holds. We can derive 𝑎 either only via the ﬁrst rule, only via the second rule, via both rules or not at all. Each of these
possibilities leads to an answer set with probability 0.25. Thus, the result of the query for 𝑎 is 0.75. Clearly, the program

0.5 ∶∶ 𝑎.

𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦(𝑎),

would instead only lead to a result of 0.5.
This behavior may seem unintuitive at ﬁrst glance, however, it makes much more sense when we interpret rules of the form (21)
as a possible reason that can cause 𝑎𝑖 . If the rule always contributed a weight 𝑟𝑖 , when 𝑎𝑖 and its body hold, then the program

𝑎.

0.5 ∶∶ 𝑎.

𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦(𝑎),

would lead to a query result of 0.5 although clearly 𝑎 has a 100% probability of being true in a randomly selected answer set. We
stress that in aspmc the above program returns a 100% probability of 𝑎 being true, as expected.
We allow non-ground programs, which may even have variables in the place of semiring values but do not go into the details
here for simplicity.
In order to parse programs that are speciﬁed using the above syntax, we wrote our own parser in python using the parser
generator lark [99], which is able to generate an LL parser on the ﬂy given its speciﬁcation as a grammar. The generation on the ﬂy
is important, as we need to incorporate parsing of semiring values dynamically based on the semiring we use.
8.2. Grounding & simpliﬁcation
After parsing the possibly non-ground input speciﬁcation, we need to ground the program in a ﬁrst step. There exists a variety of
grounding engines for programs already, for example, in ProbLog or clingo. Neither of them accept exactly the same kind of programs
as we do, nevertheless, we were still able to exploit the grounding capabilities of clingo, instead of reinventing the wheel. For this,
we restructure the parsed input as follows.
Standard ASP rules are kept as they are. A rule of the form

𝑟 = 𝑟1 ∶∶ 𝑎1 ; … ; 𝑟𝑘 ∶∶ 𝑎𝑘 ∶ ∓ 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑚 ,
is transformed into the set of rules

𝑔𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑠(𝑟) ∶ ∓ 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑚 .
𝑎1 ∶ ∓ 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑚 , alg(𝑖𝑑, 1, var(𝑟), 𝑎1 , 𝑟1 ).
28

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

…
𝑎𝑘 ∶ ∓ 𝑏1 , … , 𝑏𝑛 , not 𝑐1 , … , not 𝑐𝑚 , alg(𝑖𝑑, 𝑘, var(𝑟), 𝑎𝑘 , 𝑟𝑘 ),
where 𝑔𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑠(𝑟) is

alg(𝑖𝑑, 1, var(𝑟), 𝑎1 , 𝑟1 ); … ; alg(𝑖𝑑, 𝑘, var(𝑟), 𝑎𝑘 , 𝑟𝑘 ); alg(𝑖𝑑, 𝑘 + 1, var(𝑟), 𝑛, 𝑛).
Here, an atom of the form alg(𝑖𝑑, 𝑖, var(𝑟), 𝑎𝑖 , 𝑟𝑖 ) for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑘 is true, when the rule with id 𝑖𝑑 is used to derive the atom 𝑎𝑖 with
weight 𝑟𝑖 , instantiated with the variables in var(𝑟). Thus, the ﬁrst rule states for each of the instantiations of the variables var(𝑟)
of 𝑟 that if the body holds, then we may derive one of the atoms 𝑎𝑖 . If alg(𝑖𝑑, 𝑘 + 1, var(𝑟), 𝑛, 𝑛) is true, then none of the atoms are
supposed to be derived.
The remaining rules then implement that if the body holds and the atom alg(𝑖𝑑, 𝑖, var(𝑟), 𝑎𝑖 , 𝑟𝑖 ) is set to true, then 𝑎𝑖 is derived.
This rewriting is similar to the one that the ProbLog applies to rules of the form (21). If the semiring is the probabilistic semiring,
we apply some further optimizations of the ProbLog solver in addition. Since they are described in detail in Appendix B of [100],
we do not discuss them here and only note that they seem to be beneﬁcial for performance but do not trivially generalize to other
semirings.
Notably, clingo not only grounds programs but performs basic simpliﬁcations, such as removing atoms that are stated as facts
from the bodies of rules. Apart from this, the only additional simpliﬁcation that we perform after grounding is that we omit rules
whose head atom occurs positively in the body. There are other simpliﬁcations that one could apply, such as the restriction of the
program to its relevant ground part or the replacement of algebraic atoms 𝑎 with weight 𝑒⊕ by the constraints ∶ ∓ 𝑎.. The former
has so far only been considered for probabilistic reasoning and is implemented in ProbLog. We did not implement the restriction to
the relevant ground part yet, however if this capability is desired, ProbLog can be used as a preprocessor. We leave generalized and
possibly extended preprocessing for future work.
8.3. Cycle breaking
Recall that the three approaches to eliminate cycles that we considered in Section 7 have the following properties:
• MJ(.) is implemented in ProbLog, has a treewidth upper bound of (𝑘 ⋅ 𝑠 ⋅ 𝑐), where 𝑘 is the original treewidth 𝑠 is the size of the
largest SCC of the dependency graph and 𝑐 is the maximum number of simple cycles in an SCC of the dependency graph.
• JN(.), which has been considered for ProbLog [36] (an implementation is available online [101]) comes instead with a treewidth
upper bound of (𝑘 log(𝑠)).
• Our T -Unfolding algorithm has a treewidth upper bound of (𝑘 ⋅ cbs(DEP(Π))), where cbs(.) is a structural parameter that
intuitively measures the cyclicity of the dependency graph DEP (Π) of the program Π.
Judging by the treewidth guarantee alone, it suggests itself to use JN(.), since its treewidth increase scales logarithmically with the
size of the largest SCC. Thus, unless the program dependency graph DEP(Π) is rather sparse, we expect that cbs(DEP(Π)) supersedes
log2 (𝑠). However, as we mentioned above, JN(.) uses binary counters in the encoding, which as well-known may impact negatively
the performance during solving.
Furthermore, Fierens et al.’s [36] comparison of MJ(.) and JN(.) provides additional interesting aspects to take into consideration.
They found that on small programs MJ (.) produces signiﬁcantly smaller CNFs than JN(.), while JN(.) leads to much smaller CNFs
on larger programs. This suggests that MJ(.) allows for faster inference on small programs. Furthermore, they found that only very
few programs seem to be large enough to make JN (.) proﬁtable, meaning that knowledge compilation is feasible and JN(.) yields
better results. While the state of the art in knowledge compilation has seen signiﬁcant improvements since 2011, we expect that both
binary counters and signiﬁcant size diﬀerences still will play a role in addition to treewidth.
This brings us to the T -Unfolding approach. It is an improvement upon MJ(.) both in terms of the size of the encoding, which is
at most quadratic with a small constant factor, and in terms of the treewidth, which is at most linear in the size of the largest SCC 𝑆
even if 𝑆 is fully connected. We thus expect that T -Unfolding signiﬁcantly outperforms both MJ(.) and JN(.), even when using the
current state of the art knowledge compilers.
In order to perform T -Unfolding by Algorithm 1, we need a path preserving unfolding sequence 𝑠 though. We have shown that
based on a small component-boosted backdoor, which is guaranteed to exist if cbs(.) is small, we can compute a good such sequence
𝑠. However, computing this parameter exactly is NP-hard (see Theorem 29). While the backdoor size is also NP-hard to compute,
there exist eﬃcient solvers for it. Thus, we restrict ourselves to computing a (small) backdoor into polytrees for every SCC 𝑆 of
DEP(Π), i.e. a subset 𝐵 ⊂ 𝑆 such that no undirected cycle in DEP(Π) lies in 𝑆 ⧵ 𝐵 .
Note that a backdoor into polytrees is a Feedback Vertex Set (FVS). Computing a FVS is a well studied problem and there are many
open source solvers available due to the 2016 edition of PACE [102]. We use the implementation [63] of Kiljan and Pilipczuk [103],
who re-implemented many of the participating algorithms under a permissive license. We run the exact version of the solver using
a ﬁxed timeout of 30 seconds to try to obtain an optimal backdoor 𝐵 . If the answer is not produced within the timeout, we run the
heuristic version of the solver to obtain an approximation quickly.
29

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

8.4. Clark’s completion
After performing T -Unfolding, the resulting program is tight, i.e. its dependency graph is acyclic. Therefore, we can apply Clark’s
Completion on it to receive a CNF that we can then compile in the next step. Here, we again have three possible options:
• Clark(.), which does not admit any treewidth guarantees;
• PClark(.), i.e. Hecher’s primal tree decomposition guidance, which admits a treewidth guarantee of 3(𝑘 + 1) if 𝑘 is the treewidth
of the tree decomposition of PRIM (Π) in use;
• IClark(.), i.e. our novel incidence tree decomposition guidance, which admits a treewidth guarantee of 3(𝑘 + 1) if 𝑘 is the
treewidth of the used tree decomposition of INC (Π) in use.
Based on the treewidth guarantees alone, it is suggestive to always use IClark(.). However, while it has the best worst case guarantees,
it is not guaranteed that the obtained CNF always has the lowest treewidth out of the three. While the resulting treewidth cannot
become much higher than that of a CNF obtained by Clark(.) or PClark(.), it may be as high or slightly higher and lead to a slightly
larger CNF.
We therefore implemented all three versions of Clark’s Completion and allow for a selection via input parameters, which we will
use to compare the diﬀerent strategies below.
In order to apply the tree decomposition guided versions PClark(.) and IClark(.) of Clark’s Completion, we need access to tree
decompositions of PRIM(Π) and INC(Π). Generating optimal tree decompositions is expensive but there exist several good heuristic
solvers such as ﬂow-cutter [104], tamaki-2017 [105], and htd [106]. We use ﬂow-cutter since it performed very well in the PACE
competition of 2017 regarding the heuristic computation of treewidth, achieving the best average approximation ratio and the best
maximum approximation ratio of all solvers [107]. Furthermore, it has a permissive open source license that allows for combining
it with closed source code such as c2d (version 2.20). Whenever we generate tree decompositions, we use a given timeout from the
input. We wait until a tree decomposition has been found and the timeout has passed, whichever happens later. Then, we use the
best tree decomposition found. This means that on large graphs we may supersede the given timeout.
After Clark’s Completion, we extend the resulting CNF with annotations denoting the semiring in use, and the weights of literals
over the semiring.
8.5. Knowledge compilation
For the knowledge compilation step, which we perform in an online manner, there is a wide range of tools available that compile
to diﬀerent tractable circuit representations, such as
• to BDDs, e.g., [108,44]
• to SDDs, e.g., [43], and
• to d-DNNFs, e.g., [46,53,109,45].
We focus on the compilers for d-DNNFs, as they tend to have the best worst-case guarantees in terms of treewidth. Furthermore,
they also usually perform well on the related tasks of model counting and weighted model counting as seen in the Model Counting
Competition 2020 [110].
More speciﬁcally, we implemented the knowledge compilation step for solvers that are recent or ranked high in the 2021 edition
of the weighted model counting track of the Model Counting Competition 2021 [111]. We focus on this track, as we are interested
in the performance of the actual compilation. The unweighted track could possibly have skewed results as preprocessing that is
not applicable to weighted can lead to signiﬁcant performance improvements. The solvers SHARP SAT-TD [47], d4 [53], and c2d
[46] ﬁnished top three in the weighted model counting track, miniC2D [45] is a recent knowledge compiler, which is why we also
included it.
Notably, whereas c2d, miniC2D, and d4 allow for knowledge compilation by default, this is not the case for SHARP SAT-TD,
which was originally a solver conceived only for (weighted) model counting. Thus, we modiﬁed SHARP SAT-TD to enable its usage
for knowledge compilation. This turned out to be rather easy: since SHARP SAT-TD was designed to be extensible to general semirings,
we could exploit the idea of the arithmetic circuit semiring from Section 4.1. Speciﬁcally, in our implementation we used d-DNNF
nodes as semiring elements and combined them in a conjunctive/disjunctive manner whenever SHARP SAT-TD multiplied/added two
values. Not only does this lead to an algebraic circuit but to a d-DNNF, which is moreover smooth.5
Apart from SHARP SAT-TD, we also performed a minor modiﬁcation in d4. Namely, by default d4 does not produce smooth dDNNFs, which leads to an increase in the evaluation time. For this reason, we made minor modiﬁcations to the part of the source code
of d4 that writes d-DNNFs, to ensure their smoothness d-DNNFs. Notably, the necessary information was already present meaning
that we could keep our modiﬁcations to a minimum.6 The source code of c2d and miniC2D were left unmodiﬁed.

5
6

Source code of the modiﬁed version: https://github.com/raki123/sharpsat-td; For the original: https://github.com/Laakeri/sharpsat-td.
Source code of the modiﬁed version: https://github.com/raki123/d4; For the original: https://github.com/crillab/d4.
30

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

The exact input arguments that we use for the diﬀerent knowledge compilers can be found in Appendix C. Most settings are rather
standard, however, we should mention that for c2d and miniC2D we supply custom dtrees and vtrees, respectively, which determine
the order in which variables are decided during compilation.
We chose to generate custom dtrees and vtrees, since Korhonen and Järvisalo, [47] showed that the performance of c2d and
miniC2D beneﬁts from it. Namely, they used the fact that, for a given tree decomposition, we can generate dtrees and vtrees that
give us a performance guarantee7 of (2𝑘 ⋅ 𝑘 ⋅ |𝐶|𝑐 ), where 𝑘 is the width of the tree decomposition, |𝐶| is the size of the CNF, and 𝑐
is some constant. This guarantee can be achieved by ﬁrst deciding all variables in the root of the tree decomposition and proceeding
recursively for the children [47]. Both c2d and miniC2D were shown to solve signiﬁcantly more instances using this strategy than
when using the standard settings [47]. We provide details regarding how we generate dtrees and vtrees in Appendix D, which only
insigniﬁcantly diﬀers from Korhonen and Järvisalo’s method. The tree decompositions used in this step are again generated using
ﬂow-cutter [104] using a timeout given in the input.
8.6. Evaluation
Given a (smooth) d-DNNF, the evaluation procedure is rather standard. We initialize the weights of the literals using the weight
labels of our extended CNF format. Then, we parse the d-DNNF line by line and interpret it as an arithmetic circuit by combining the
inputs to AND gates via multiplication and the inputs to OR gates via addition. The result we obtain at the root node of the d-DNNF
then corresponds to the ﬁnal result of our query. This step is well-known and well-understood, which is why we do not go into details
here but refer the interested reader to [30].
The only additional comment in order regards the evaluation of non-smooth d-DNNFs as produced by miniC2D, since not all
variables are guaranteed to occur in every branch of the d-DNNF, which can lead to wrong results during naive evaluation as
described above. The only case in which a literal may not occur in a branch is if both values are accepted in the branch. E.g. for the
program {𝑎} ← the empty NNF is a valid d-DNNF. If the variable 𝑎 does not occur in a branch, we need to multiply the value of the
branch by the sum of the weights of 𝑎 and ¬𝑎. Naively, this is easily possible by tracking the assigned and unassigned variables that
occur below each node but costly. However, given that we know the vtree that the CNF was compiled with, we can do this more
eﬃciently by keeping track of which vtree node a d-DNNF node belongs to and multiplying its weight by the corresponding factor
when we notice that variables are missing.
9. Experiments
In order to evaluate the impact of our theoretical results in practice, we performed an extensive experimental evaluation. Furthermore, we compared the performance of our solver aspmc to state of the art solvers on probabilistic inference instances. All results
and benchmarks can be found online.8
9.1. Questions & hypotheses
The ﬁrst question we consider addresses the properties of the encodings that diﬀerent cycle breakings result in.
Q1. CNF encodings How do the cycle breakings MJ(.), JN(.) and T -Unfolding(.) diﬀer in terms of size and treewidth (upper bound)
of the ﬁnal CNF encoding?
We expect that T -Unfolding is almost always better than MJ(.) with respect to both size and treewidth (see Section 7.4).
Furthermore, we expect that for small-sized and medium-sized programs, T -Unfolding results in lower CNF sizes than JN(.), but
yields larger sizes for bigger programs due to the asymptotic guarantee. In terms of treewidth, we expect that JN(.) leads to lower
treewidth unless the given program has only very minor cyclic positive dependencies, which means a very small component-boosted
backdoor size.
Second, we are interested in ﬁnding the best conﬁguration of options to use for aspmc. While we always use T -Unfolding for
cycle breaking, we still have to decide which version of Clark’s Completion to apply and which knowledge compiler to use.
Q2.1. Variants of Clark’s completion Does tree decomposition-guidance of Clark’s Completion provide a beneﬁt compared to unguided
Clark’s Completion?
Q2.2. Eﬀect of knowledge compiler Which knowledge compiler leads to the best AASC performance?
For Q2.1, we anticipate that tree decomposition-guidance can only decrease the performance, if the treewidth of the CNF obtained
with guidance is the same or slightly higher than the one obtained without guidance. Even then, the decrease should be marginal.
However, when the guidance has a positive impact on the treewidth of the resulting CNF, we naturally expect a performance increase.

7
Strictly speaking, it is not clear whether this is only a guarantee for miniC2D but also for c2d at least in the way that we as well as Korhonen and Järvisalo
generate dtrees and run c2d. This is because c2d has an optimization built in that skips deciding variables whose “turn” it would usually be, if these variables are not
necessary to decompose the current CNF into separate components. This optimization can be turned oﬀ using the input option “force” of c2d. However, this seems to
only degrade the overall performance.
8
github.com/raki123/aspmc_benchmarks/tree/aspmc_results.

31

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Regarding Q2.2, it seems reasonable to assume that SHARP SAT-TD performs best, followed by d4, and c2d since they were the
top three solvers on the weighted model counting track of the Model Counting Competition 2021. miniC2D did not participate. With
Q2.2 we want to ﬁnd out, whether this translates to the same performance when we perform knowledge compilation ﬁrst and then
evaluate rather than performing weighted model counting immediately within the solver.
Last but not least, given the overall best conﬁguration for AASC with aspmc from the results of the previous questions, we want to
compare our solver with the state of the art software in probabilistic logic programming.
Q3. Overall performance Does aspmc provide a signiﬁcant performance increase compared to the state of the art solvers for probabilistic logic programming?
We expect this to be the case, since the pipeline that uses knowledge compilation of CNFs comes with the best performance
guarantees. Furthermore, we anticipate our cycle breaking and Clark’s Completion to exhibit better solving capacity than other
approaches that compile CNF to sd-DNNF. On top of that, we use the state of the art knowledge compilers for CNF to sd-DNNF,
which have seen signiﬁcant performance improvements in recent years.
9.2. Setup
Benchmark instances

We use probabilistic logic programming instances for all questions, divided into four sets of instances:

• Smokers [35] For programs with varying levels of positive cyclic dependencies, we use the well-known smokers example (see
Example 1) with varying extensions of the input predicates person and friend. We generated the benchmarks ourselves using the
Barbàsi-Albert graph model [112], which is known to generate so called scale-free graphs that resemble typical networks in real
life. For each vertex in the graph, we add one person and for each edge (𝑣, 𝑣′ ) we add friend(𝑣, 𝑣′ ) to the input. We used varying
graph sizes (𝑛 = 3, … , 49) and vertex degrees (𝑚 = 2, … , min(𝑛 − 1, 10)) leading to graphs of varying density (namely, (𝑛 − 1) ⋅ 𝑚
edges).
• Near Tree Additionally, we introduce what we call near tree instances: a new cyclic benchmark set concerning reachability on
almost trees. To generate the programs, we used as ingredients a directed graph 𝐺 and the base program

𝑟(𝑠).
0.1 ∶∶ 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝(𝑌 ) ∶ ∓ 𝑝(𝑋, 𝑌 ).
𝑟(𝑌 ) ∶ ∓ 𝑝(𝑋, 𝑌 ).
1∕𝑑(𝑋) ∶∶ 𝑝(𝑋, 𝑠 (𝑋)); … ; 1∕𝑑(𝑋) ∶∶ 𝑝(𝑋, 𝑠 (𝑋)) ∶ ∓ 𝑟(𝑋), not 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝(𝑋).
1
𝑑

Here, 𝑑(𝑋) is the number of outgoing arcs of 𝑋 in 𝐺 , and the vertices 𝑠1 (𝑋), … , 𝑠𝑑 (𝑋) are the immediate descendants. We
obtain the ﬁnal program by replacing the variables 𝑋, 𝑌 with constants corresponding to the vertices of 𝐺 .
This program models that we reach (denoted by 𝑟(.)) the starting vertex 𝑠 and, at each vertex 𝑣 that we reach, decide uniformly
at random which outgoing arc we include in our path (denoted by 𝑝(., .)). If we include the arc (𝑣, 𝑤), then we reach the vertex
𝑤. However, we only include an arc, if we do not get trapped (denoted by 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝(.)) at 𝑣.
As for the digraph 𝐺 , we used two parameters 𝑛, 𝑘 ∈ ℕ to generate it as follows. We ﬁrst generated a random tree of size 𝑛
using the python library networkx, where each arc in the tree is bidirectional. Then, we added 𝑘 vertices and connected them
to each of the 𝑛 original vertices in the tree bidirectionally. Finally, we added one vertex as the goal vertex, with incoming arcs
from each of the 𝑘 additional vertices. As the start 𝑠 we use the root of the tree.
These graphs are almost trees in the sense that (i) their treewidth is approximately min(𝑘, 𝑛)9 and (ii) its component-boosted
backdoor size is 2 ⋅ 𝑘, since we obtain a (poly)tree after removing the 𝑘 added vertices.
We use one instance for each combination of 𝑛 = 10, 20, … , 100 and 𝑘 = 1, 2, … , 5.
• Growing Heads & Growing Negated Bodies [85] The synthetic benchmark sets of growing heads (gh) and growing negated
bodies (gnb) compare the diﬃculty of reasoning in the presence of long heads such as

𝑝1 ∶∶ 𝑎1 ; … ; 𝑝𝑖 ∶∶ 𝑎𝑖 ∶ ∓ 𝑎𝑖+1 ,
and long negated bodies

0.5 ∶∶ 𝑎𝑖 ∶ ∓ not 𝑎𝑖+1 , … , not 𝑎𝑛−1 , 𝑎𝑛 .
Here the length of the heads and negated bodies varies from 1 to 25 and 1 to 200 (after 50 only in steps of 10), respectively.
Both gh and gnb only feature acyclic programs.
• Blood [85] The blood benchmark set consists of 100 instances, which compute probabilities of blood types given the blood types
of ancestors. Also the blood benchmarks are all acyclic; they have vastly varying sizes but treewidth at most 10.

9

Observe that every vertex in the graph has at least degree min(𝑛, 𝑘), which is known to imply treewidth ≥ min(𝑛, 𝑘).
32

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Benchmark platform We ran all solvers on a cluster of 12 nodes, each equipped with two Intel Xeon E5-2650 CPUs with 2.2 GHz
and access to 256 GB shared RAM under Ubuntu 16.04.1 LTS powered on kernel 4.4.0-139 with no hyperthreading operating Python
3.7.6. Per instance, we set a memory limit of 32 GB and a time limit of 1800 secs on a single core.
Solvers compared We compare a variety of solvers from probabilistic logic programming, as well as diﬀerent conﬁgurations of our
own solver. Namely, we include
• LPMLN [10] version 1.1: LPMLN performs probabilistic reasoning by enumeration of all stable models. plingo [38] is an alternative
solver with the same strategy that however only exhibits slightly better performance [38].
• ProbLog [35] version 2.1.0.42: ProbLog uses the MJ(.) cycle breaking followed by knowledge compilation. It supports diﬀerent
circuit classes for compilation. We include compilation of CNF to sd-DNNF using either D SHARP [109] (denoted “+ Dsharp”) or
c2d (denoted “+ c2d”) as knowledge compilers, and of the acyclic programs to SDD using PySDD [113,114] (denoted “-k sdd).
• PITA [13] version 4.5.0 using the Prolog engine swipl version 8.5.1: PITA compiles cyclic programs to BDD using the CuDD
package version 3.0.0 [44].
• LP 2 LP 2 [56] version 1.23: LP 2 LP 2 performs the JN(.) cycle breaking. The input options “-g” and “-l” ensure a bijective correspondence between stable models. Here, we do not perform probabilistic inference, as the weights get lost during cycle breaking.
Instead we use SHARP SAT-TD afterwards to compile the resulting CNF into an sd-DNNF to count its models.
• aspmc (our solver) version 1.0.7. We always use the input option “-dt 10” to specify that tree decompositions should be computed
with a timeout of ten seconds.
To vary the version of Clark’s Completion that we use, we specify “-g none”, “-g ors”, or “-g both” to use unguided, primal
tree decomposition guided or incidence tree decomposition guided Clark’s Completion.
To specify the knowledge compiler we use “-k c2d”, “-k miniC2D”, “-k d4”, or “-k sharpsat-td” to use c2d version 2.20,
miniC2D version 1.0.0, d4 from https://github.com/raki123/d4, or our modiﬁed version of SHARP SAT-TD from https://github.
com/raki123/sharpsat-td.
Comparisons
Q1. CNF encodings We produce a CNF using the diﬀerent cycle breaking algorithms of aspmc, ProbLog, and LP 2 LP 2 and extract the
size of the encoding (i.e. number of clauses) as well as decent treewidth upper bounds from the ﬁrst tree decomposition found by
ﬂow-cutter.
Notably, since the CNF encodings all use Clark’s Completion, the diﬀerences in the size of the encoding and treewidth are due
to the cycle breaking implemented by the solver. Therefore, we restrict our comparison here to the smokers and the near tree
benchmark sets, which contains the instances where cycle breaking is necessary. Furthermore, we only consider instances whose
number of clauses was less than 25000 and whose treewidth upper-bound was less than 200, which includes all solved instances
apart from very few outliers.
Recall that the asymptotic size guarantees tell us that large enough instances JN(.) is better than T -Unfolding, which in turn
is better than MJ(.). We assume that the instances, where this kicks in, are so large that knowledge compilation is bound to fail,
regardless of the encoding. Consequently, we also take into account the runtime of the instances such that we can establish the
properties of the encoding on the instances relevant to us, i.e. those that are in principle solvable using the given cycle breaking.
Q2.1. Variants of Clark’s completion Here, we want to ensure that eﬀects on performance for diﬀerent versions of Clark’s Completion
results from the exploitation of a lower treewidth in the decision heuristic of the knowledge compiler. Since d4’s decision heuristic
is not based on tree decompositions and SHARP SAT-TD uses a secondary heuristic in combination with the tree decomposition, there
is no guarantee that variables are only decided based on the order entailed by the tree decomposition. On the other hand, for c2d
and miniC2D, we always specify an input dtree/vtree such that the variables are decided in the order corresponding to the tree
decomposition. Therefore, we ran aspmc with varying versions of Clark’s Completion and c2d respectively miniC2D as knowledge
compiler for this question.
Q2.2. Eﬀect of knowledge compiler To test the performance of the diﬀerent knowledge compilers, we ran aspmc with the best performing version of Clark’s Completion from Q2.1.
Q3. Overall performance For the general comparison, we include all solvers and conﬁgurations listed above, while for aspmc we use
only the best performing Clark Completion.
9.3. Results & discussion
Q1. CNF encodings The results for this experiment are shown in Fig. 8, which contains one XY-plot for T -Unfolding, JN(.), and
MJ(.) in Figs. 8a, 8b, and 8c, where the runtime is color-coded. We note that in almost all cases a light green data point not only
indicates a high running time, close to 1800 seconds, but even that the instances represented by that data point all timed out.
As expected, we see that for MJ(.) very few CNF encodings are in the range of 0 to 25000 clauses and 0 to 200 treewidth
upper-bound compared to T -Unfolding and JN(.), and even fewer are solvable within the time limit shown by the colors of the
33

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Fig. 8. The number of clauses, treewidth upper-bounds, and average runtimes of CNF encodings produced by diﬀerent cycle breaking algorithms on the smokers and
tree benchmark set. Restricted to instances, where the CNF encoding has less than 25000 clauses and a treewidth upper-bound less than 200. For each instance we
round the number of clauses down to the next multiple of 1000 and round the treewidth upper-bound down to the next multiple of 10. We group the instances with
the same (rounded) values and add one data point to the plot. Here, the size corresponds to the number of instances in the group and the color corresponds to the
average runtime of the instances in the group. (For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
34

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Fig. 9. Cactus plot of the results for selected aspmc conﬁgurations over all benchmark instances, ordered (top is better) by the number of solved instances.

data points. Both T -Unfolding and JN(.) have signiﬁcantly more CNF encodings within the plotted range including also many more
solved instances. Interestingly however, the distribution varies signiﬁcantly between T -Unfolding and JN(.):
• The resulting CNFs from JN(.) often have many more clauses than those from T -Unfolding. This matches the experimental
results of Fierens et al. (2011), who made similar observations for MJ(.) and JN(.) on small instances. However, while for
MJ(.) this eﬀect only occurs for small instances, we observe this eﬀect to be more consistent for T -Unfolding. Here, the better
asymptotic guarantees of JN(.) do not take eﬀect on the instances that can be solved after T -Unfolding or JN(.).
• The treewidth upper-bound is often lower for JN(.) than for T -Unfolding. We thus suspect that while the constant factors in the
size and treewidth guarantee that comes with T -Unfolding are both small, only the constant factor for the treewidth guarantee
that comes with JN(.) is small.
• For low treewidth upper-bounds and low numbers of clauses the instance density is higher for T -Unfolding than for JN(.). This
is again explained by small constant factors in the size and treewidth guarantees.
• T -Unfolding leads to a solution for signiﬁcantly more instances, namely 119 vs. 66 for JN(.). We especially highlight here
that T -Unfolding produces some CNF encodings with treewidth upper-bound above 100, which however are solved quickly
(indicated by the blue color of the data points). This is not entirely surprising, since for T -Unfolding we expected10 the actual
performance to supersede the guarantees entailed by treewidth. And, as we already mentioned, the binary counters that JN(.)
uses may also have a negative impact on performance.
The results match the expectations that we had for the diﬀerent cycle breakings. When MJ(.) results in a solution, then the CNF
encoding is usually small. However, even in this case we may reach relatively high treewidth upper bounds and as a consequence,
solve very few instances. JN(.) results in (relatively) large CNF encodings on which knowledge compilation is still feasible, presumably because it has considerably lower treewidth upper bounds than MJ(.) as guaranteed by Theorem 21. T -Unfolding is somewhere
in between: successfully evaluated instances can reach remarkable CNF sizes and still be solved. At the same time, they can have
higher treewidth upper bounds than the ones coming from JN(.); combined with medium CNF sizes, this seems to be less of an issue
than for the other encodings. We attribute this to the arguably lower hardness of the encoding obtained by T -Unfolding compared
to JN(.). While this results in a worse asymptotic scaling, it apparently leads to a smaller CNF size on instances that can still be
solved by knowledge compilation in principle. We suspect that this in combination with the lower “semantic complexity” (i.e. lack
of binary counters) is the cause for the performance improvement of T -Unfolding compared to the other cycle breakings.
Q2.1. Variants of Clark’s completion Recall that we compare the diﬀerences in performance caused by Clark(.), PClark(.), and
IClark(.), the diﬀerent versions of Clark’s Completion, when using c2d and miniC2D with a tree decomposition-guided variable
order for knowledge compilation. The results are shown in Fig. 9, where Clark(.), PClark(.), and IClark(.) are denoted by “-n”, “-o”,
and “-b”, respectively. We see that both for c2d and miniC2D Clark(.) is outperformed by PClark(.) and IClark(.). Especially, IClark(.)
exhibits a signiﬁcant performance increase compared to Clark(.).
We noticed that while tree decomposition guidance is beneﬁcial for the overall performance, this is not so clear cut for the
runtime of individual instances that Fig. 10 shows. We see that IClark(.) mostly leads to better performance, especially for c2d but
to a lesser extent also for miniC2D. However, in both cases, there are also some instances that are solved slower using IClark(.) than
using Clark(.). We assume this is because IClark(.) yields more general worst case guarantees but may lead to an increase in CNF size
and treewidth by a constant factor compared to Clark(.) when the high treewidth is inherent rather than due to translation issues
that are addressed by tree decomposition guidance (i.e. rules with long bodies or many rules with the same head). In this case, the

10

Recall the observation after Lemma 26.
35

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Fig. 10. Scatter plots comparing the runtimes of individual ﬁles computed by conﬁguration “-b” (incidence guiding), compared to “-n” (no guiding) for miniC2D (on
top) and c2d (on bottom).

Fig. 11. Cactus plot of the results for selected solver conﬁgurations over all benchmark instances, ordered (top is better) by the number of solved instances.

performance naturally suﬀers a bit. This matches the intuition that we get from the scatter plots in Fig. 10. While sometimes no
guidance leads to better performance, the gain is somewhat limited.
Nevertheless, we chose to add an additional conﬁguration to aspmc in order to test whether we can counter this phenomenon. The
idea is that we only use guidance if it is expected to provide a beneﬁt. To estimate the latter, we compute an approximate prediction
for the treewidths of the CNFs obtained by all three versions of Clark’s Completion and use the version with the lowest value.
We included the runtime of this conﬁguration of aspmc in Fig. 9 together with the knowledge compiler SHARP SAT-TD as “aspmc
-c sharpsattd”. While it has higher runtime than “aspmc -b sharpsattd” on many instances, it indeed solves a few more instances.
Therefore, we chose to include it for SHARP SAT-TD.
Q2.2. Eﬀect of knowledge compiler Apart from Clark’s Completion, also the knowledge compiler used to obtain a tractable circuit
representation has an eﬀect on the performance. The results of the comparison of such compilers are also given in Fig. 9. Here, we
see that SHARP SAT-TD leads to the best performance as expected; c2d and d4 have worse performance but both outperform miniC2D
signiﬁcantly. Interestingly, c2d solves more instances than d4 although d4 performed better in the weighted track of the 2021 model
counting competition. We suspect the comparatively poor performance of miniC2D results as it produces SDDs with a ﬁxed vtree,
while all other solvers produce sd-DNNFs. This means that variables always need to occur in the same order in every branch of the
produced circuit, which lowers the beneﬁt of unit propagation in the solver.
Given the ﬁndings of Q2.1 and Q2.2, we conclude that conﬁguration “aspmc -c sharpsattd”, i.e. dynamically choosing which version
of Clark’s Completion to apply based on approximations of the treewidth of the resulting CNF in combination with SHARP SAT-TD as
knowledge compiler, is the most promising conﬁguration for aspmc.
Q3. Overall performance Having established the best conﬁguration for aspmc, we investigated the overall performance of aspmc
compared to other solvers for probabilistic inference. Here, we exclude the conﬁgurations of aspmc that use no guidance (‘-n‘) or
primal guidance (‘-o‘), since they performed worse during the internal evaluation. The results are summarized in Fig. 11.
36

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

We observe that aspmc’s best conﬁguration (“aspmc -c sharpsattd”) has by far the best overall performance of all solvers with
259 solved instances. But also the other conﬁgurations, except the one that uses miniC2D performed very well, with 251 (“aspmc -b
sharpsattd”), 241 (“aspmc -b c2d”), and 206 (“aspmc -b d4”) solved instances. ProbLog solved 224 instances when using c2d as the
knowledge compiler (“ProbLog + c2d”), however interestingly it only solved 120 and 119 instances when D SHARP (“ProbLog +
Dsharp”) and PySDD (“ProbLog-k sdd”) are used, respectively.
The next best performing approach was LP 2 LP 2,11 which solved 213 instances - only 7 more than “aspmc -b d4”. LP 2 LP 2 and
“aspmc -b d4” are followed by PITA, which solved 154 instances, thus beating “aspmc -b minic2d”, which only solved 148 instances.
Last but not least, LPMLN solved 24 instances.
It is unsurprising that LPMLN solved the least instances, since it explicitly enumerates all the models. For probabilistic inference
on ProbLog programs this quickly becomes infeasible, since the number of answer sets it needs to consider is exactly 2𝐹 , where 𝐹 is
the number of probabilistic facts of the program.
Similarly, it was expected that aspmc solved the most instances, due to our advancements of cycle breaking and Clark’s Completion
combined with the high eﬃciency of modern knowledge compilers.
The results of ProbLog in comparison to the other solvers are surprising. In Q1, we found that JN(.) outperforms MJ(.) on
many instances but has worse performance than T -Unfolding on the relevant instances. Thus, one may expect that the diﬀerent
cycle breakings determine the performance on cyclic instances and that on acyclic instances the performance mostly depends on the
knowledge compiler. Here, we however see that this is not the case. While aspmc solves more instances than LP 2 LP 2 and ProbLog,
LP 2 LP 2 solves less instances overall, even though it uses the likely best knowledge compiler (i.e. SHARP SAT-TD) and solves more
cyclic instances.
Additionally, using c2d instead of D SHARP for compilation in ProbLog seems to have a huge positive impact on the performance;
while a positive eﬀect was not completely unexpected, the extent was surprising.
The relation of the performance of ProbLog’s compilation to SDDs (“ProbLog -k sdd”) and PITA, however, may come as a surprise.
The latter uses bottom up compilation to BDDs, whereas the former performs bottom up compilation to SDDs, which have strictly
better theoretical guarantees than BDDs. However, BDDs may already be good enough; in this case a more complex representation
using SDDs may come with unnecessary overhead. Additionally, existing BDD libraries may use additional performance optimizations
not implemented in the SDD library that ProbLog uses. Furthermore, neither implementation uses the theoretical guarantees explicitly
by computing a vtree/variable order e.g. from a tree decomposition. Instead, PITA’s BDD library CUDD [44] uses dynamic variable
reordering to speed up compilation. While PySDD also has a similar feature, its usage has been disabled in ProbLog for probabilistic
inference.12 The fact that ProbLog does not solve any of the blood instances, which have a simple structure that could be exploited,
using option “-k sdd” but solves some (resp. all of them) when compiling to sd-DNNF with D SHARP (resp. c2d), as can be observed in
Table 2. Apart from that, PITA does not use the same idea for handling cyclic dependencies as ProbLog, which may also contribute
to the improved performance on cyclic instances.
This covers the overall performance comparison of the diﬀerent solvers. We consider in more detail the performance on the
diﬀerent benchmark sets, shown in Table 2. Mostly, the results per benchmark set are reﬂected by the general performance already.
However, we want to highlight some interesting ﬁndings separately.
Especially an explanation of the high overall performance of “ProbLog + c2d” is of interest here, given the relatively poor
performance on cyclic instances. We see immediately that the high performance comes from the blood and gnb sets. Not only does
“ProbLog + c2d” solve the most instances here, it is also noticeably faster than other conﬁgurations. While it also solves the most
instances on the gh set, we see that there is a tie with aspmc here.
One may think that merely the use of c2d as a compiler causes the performance. However, on the cyclic benchmark sets “ProbLog
+ Dsharp” actually solves slightly more instances than “ProbLog + c2d”. Additionally, we see that also “aspmc-b c2d” did not solve
as many instances on the blood and gnb data sets as “ProbLog + c2d”. Hence, there is likely an additional diﬀerent reason for the
performance.
We investigated ProbLog more closely and found that while its Clark Completion is standard (i.e. corresponding to Clark(.)), it
makes use of a manifold of preprocessing techniques on the program level, in order to reduce the size of the program representation
before Clark’s Completion is applied [88,35]. We therefore compared the CNF sizes produced by ProbLog, LP 2 LP 2, and aspmc to see
if there were signiﬁcant diﬀerences on the gnb and blood sets. (See Fig. 12.)
The results are given in Section 9.3. We indeed see a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the sizes of the CNFs produced by the diﬀerent tools.
While aspmc and LP 2 LP 2 behave similarly, ProbLog’s encodings are much smaller due to its program level preprocessing capabilities.
The smaller size and the usage of c2d as a knowledge compiler indeed reasonably explain why ProbLog is so much faster on these
instances. Especially the blood instances have low treewidth and thus the performance bottle neck is not the complicated structure
(as it is e.g. for the smokers instances) but the size of the encoding.
Apart from that, let us closely look at using aspmc with d4. We note that even though the performance is not extremely high
in general, it performs best on the benchmark sets gnb and tree. We attribute this to the fact that d4 uses a diﬀerent heuristic for
the selection of variables during compilation than those of the other compilers, which are all primarily tree decomposition guided.
However, while this seems to help for gnb and tree, on the blood benchmark set a tree decomposition guided heuristic seems much

11
The results for LP 2 LP 2 must be taken with a grain of salt, since model counting over an sd-DNNF is slightly easier than evaluating multiple probabilistic queries
over an sd-DNNF.
12
At least this is what we found when inspecting the source code of ProbLog.

37

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Table 2
Results of the overall comparison of the diﬀerent solvers and conﬁgurations. The columns show
the solver, the sum of solved instances on the benchmark set, the maximum treewidth (upper
bound) of a solved instance, followed by the number of solved instances in diﬀerent ranges of
treewidth upper bounds. The last two columns show the number of instances solved by this solver
only and the total time spent on the benchmark set. Boldface highlights best values.
solver

∑

max(tw)

tw range group
0-10
10-20

>20

unique

time[h]

45
40
40
39
37
34
33
32
31
5
0

5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2.15
4.33
4.88
4.92
5.66
7.09
6.68
8.54
10.42
21.18
29.51

problog + c2d
aspmc -b d4
aspmc -c sharpsattd
aspmc -b sharpsattd
lp2lp2
problog + Dsharp
problog -k sdd
aspmc -b c2d
pita
aspmc -b minic2d
lpmln

64
59
59
58
56
53
52
51
50
24
6

growing negated body
191.0
9
10
141.0
9
10
141.0
9
10
131.0
9
10
121.0
9
10
81.0
9
10
71.0
9
10
61.0
9
10
61.0
9
10
25.0
9
10
7.0
6
0

problog + c2d
lp2lp2
aspmc -c sharpsattd
aspmc -b c2d
aspmc -b sharpsattd
aspmc -b d4
pita
aspmc -b minic2d
problog + Dsharp
problog -k sdd
lpmln

100
75
73
68
67
29
14
11
9
0
0

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
0
0

blood
100
75
73
68
67
29
14
11
9
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

13
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

4.27
22.11
23.48
22.34
21.18
39.56
43.85
46.87
46.06
50.5
50.5

aspmc -b d4
aspmc -c sharpsattd
aspmc -b c2d
aspmc -b sharpsattd
aspmc -b minic2d
problog + Dsharp
problog + c2d
pita
lp2lp2
problog -k sdd
lpmln

22
19
18
16
16
13
13
10
9
3
0

53.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
36.0
29.0
13.0
0

near tree
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0

6
6
5
4
5
4
4
5
5
2
0

15
12
12
11
10
8
8
4
3
0
0

3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

15.68
16.37
16.49
17.17
17.48
18.67
18.96
20.62
21.63
23.52
25.0

aspmc -b sharpsattd
aspmc -c sharpsattd
aspmc -b c2d
aspmc -b minic2d
aspmc -b d4
pita
lp2lp2
problog -k sdd
problog + Dsharp
problog + c2d
lpmln

92
90
88
82
81
64
57
52
29
28
12

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
4.0
4.0
3.0

smoker
92
90
88
82
81
64
57
52
29
28
12

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

3
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

131.76
131.3
132.84
136.44
135.97
144.34
147.89
149.38
160.45
160.59
168.75

problog + c2d
aspmc -c sharpsattd
aspmc -b sharpsattd
pita
lp2lp2
problog + Dsharp
aspmc -b c2d
aspmc -b minic2d
aspmc -b d4
problog -k sdd
lpmln

19
18
18
16
16
16
16
15
15
12
6

21.0
21.0
19.0
18.0
17.0
18.0
17.0
16.0
16.0
14.0
8.0

growing head
8
10
9
8
9
9
8
8
9
7
8
8
9
7
9
6
9
6
8
4
6
0

1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

3.54
4.18
4.47
4.56
4.72
4.75
4.97
5.15
5.16
6.53
9.98

38

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel
Table 2 (continued)
solver

∑

max(tw)

tw range group
0-10
10-20

>20

unique

time[h]

53
50
44
54
40
55
35
15
42
33
0

2
3
1
19
0
3
0
0
0
0
0

180.22
179.51
185.18
189.51
202.01
200.71
223.8
227.13
237.03
236.6
283.75

Σ
aspmc -c sharpsattd
aspmc -b sharpsattd
aspmc -b c2d
problog + c2d
lp2lp2
aspmc -b d4
pita
aspmc -b minic2d
problog + Dsharp
problog -k sdd
lpmln

259
251
241
224
213
206
154
148
120
119
24

141.0
131.0
61.0
191.0
121.0
141.0
61.0
50.0
81.0
71.0
8.0

182
178
175
146
151
129
96
112
56
70
24

24
23
22
24
22
22
23
21
22
16
0

Fig. 12. Numbers of clauses of the CNF produced by aspmc, LP 2 LP 2 and ProbLog on (a) the blood benchmarks and (b) the gnb benchmarks.

better. Here, d4 only solves 29 instances, whereas aspmc with SHARP SAT-TD solves more than 70. This makes sense, since the
maximum treewidth upper-bound for blood was only 10, which is rather low for an acyclic instance.
Next, we take a closer look at the cyclic instances, i.e. the smokers and tree benchmark sets. Here, PITA turns out to be the best
non-aspmc based approach, solving 74 instances overall. While “aspmc -c sharpsattd” solves signiﬁcantly more instances, namely 119,
this is still better than LP 2 LP 2, which solved 66 instances even though compilation is performed with SHARP SAT-TD. Also ProbLog
only solved 55, 31, and 32 instances, in its conﬁgurations “-k sdd”, “+ Dsharp”, and “+ c2d”, respectively.
Summing up, we observe that on all benchmark sets except for blood a conﬁguration of aspmc performed best or second best.
Second, we saw that ProbLog performs very well in the acyclic case. However, this is not due to a better strategy for knowledge
compilation or Clark’s Completion but due to its advanced preprocessing capabilities. Considering the preprocessing techniques of
ProbLog for aspmc is thus interesting and desirable, which however is non-trivial and goes beyond the scope of this work.
Nevertheless, this supports the claim that combining our signiﬁcant improvements for cycle breaking, Clark’s Completion, and the
knowledge compilation step in one solver together with ProbLog’s preprocessing techniques will result in even better performance
on both cyclic and acyclic instances. Thus, this work brings us signiﬁcantly closer to a scalable approach for probabilistic inference.
10. Conclusion
We ﬁrst provide an overall summary and then we turn to issues for future work.
10.1. Summary & ﬁndings
We considered the knowledge compilation step that is usually used in order to solve Algebraic Answer Set Counting (AASC) problems, revealing interesting new insights. Its incorporation into the AASC solver aspmc led to signiﬁcant performance improvements,
especially on instances with positive cyclic dependencies.
First, we considered a variety of diﬀerent approaches to the knowledge compilation step. For the target representation MODS
exploited in enumeration-based approaches, we consider each answer set exactly once, resulting in high eﬃciency for “few” answer
sets but insurmountable intractability otherwise. Interestingly, most of the currently available worst case guarantees for the other,
more succinct tractable circuit representations are based on the same kind of structural parameters. For compilation to sd-DNNFs
39

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

and SDDs, we can derive from Theorems 16, 36 and 38 upper bounds in terms of the treewidth of a Boolean circuit representing the
program. This applies regardless of whether compilation proceeds in a bottom up (using the apply operator for SDDs) or top down
manner (using a knowledge compiler for CNFs). Similarly to SDDs, BDDs have performance guarantees in terms of the pathwidth of
a Boolean circuit representing the program, for both bottom up and top down compilation.
There exist, however, vast diﬀerences in the quality of the guarantees. These diﬀerent guarantees favor top down compilation to
sd-DNNF unless the given program is much larger than the number of inputs to a Boolean circuit representing the program. Apart
from that, the theoretical guarantees for SDDs seem to be better than those for BDDs, especially since every BDD can be represented
as an SDD. Arguably, SDDs also come at an overhead incurred by their potentially smaller sizes. Nevertheless, one would expect
SDDs to perform better than BDDs for bottom up compilation.
Second, given our preference for top down compilation to sd-DNNFs, we investigated how programs can be favorably translated
to CNFs for compilation afterwards. For the customary steps in such a translation, i.e. cycle breaking and Clark Completion, we
provided advancements.
For Clark’s Completion, Hecher’s [55] idea of guiding it with a tree decomposition in PClark(.) limits the increase of the treewidth
to a factor of three compared to the primal treewidth of the program. We instead provided the same result for the incidence treewidth
of the program using IClark(.), which may result in even better guarantees.
For cycle breaking, we analyzed the approaches MJ(.) [58] and JN(.) [56], providing novel results showing upper bounds on the
treewidth increase incurred by both translations. Here, we found guarantees for MJ(.) that are rather weak: Theorem 19 only gives
a guarantee that grows linearly in the number of simple positive cycles in the program and the number of atoms that are in positive
cyclic dependencies. While this upper bound may not be tight, the lower bounds of Theorem 20 show that there is a family (Π𝑛 )𝑛∈ℕ
of programs with constant treewidth and exactly one simple positive cycle such that the treewidth of (MJ (Π𝑛 ))𝑛∈ℕ grows at least
linearly in the size of the program. The guarantees of Theorem 21 for JN(.) on the other hand are rather strong, leading only to an
increase by at most a logarithmic factor in the size of the largest SCC of the positive dependency graph DEP(Π) of the program Π.
Nevertheless, previous experimental results revealed that large constant factors in the size bound for JN(.) limit the eﬀectiveness of
JN(.) for probabilistic reasoning on instances that are not large enough for the asymptotic guarantees to kick in [36]. We therefore
introduced a new cycle breaking called T -Unfolding. While the latter may lead to a linear increase of the treewidth in the size
of the largest SCC of DEP(Π) this may be avoided in many cases, unless DEP(Π) is highly dense. To achieve this, we introduced
the component-boosted backdoor size cbs(.), which intuitively measures the distance to directed or undirected acyclicity, similar to
parameters such as elimination distance [98]. We used cbs(.) in Theorem 22 to bound both the size increase of the program and
treewidth, notably with low constant factors.
The implementation of the theoretical advancements in the AASC solver aspmc proved to be successful. The in-depth experimental
evaluation conﬁrmed our hypotheses on the eﬀectiveness of the diﬀerent approaches to cycle breakings, showing that while T Unfolding can lead to higher treewidth upper bounds than JN(.), the latter together with the lower CNF size and presumably lower
“semantic complexity” are still suﬃcient to allow for improved eﬃciency in the compilation step. Overall we see that in the cyclic
setting, MJ(.), JN(.), and T -Unfolding solved 44, 66, and 119 instances, respectively, when cycle breaking is followed by CNF
conversion and compilation to sd-DNNF.
Also investigating Clark’s Completion paid oﬀ: both c2d and miniC2D solve the largest number of instances, if we use the incidence
guided version of Clark’s Completion.
Last but not least, we see most of our assumptions on the relationship between the various knowledge compilation techniques
conﬁrmed. That is, the compilation of CNFs to sd-DNNFs provides very good performance, as long as the MJ(.) cycle breaking is
avoided. Unsurprisingly, the enumeration-based approach of LPMLN struggles on the probabilistic inference benchmark sets that we
considered: they always have exponentially many answer sets in the number of probabilistic facts. Previous work however showed
that for programs that have a complicated structure but not many answer sets, enumeration can be beneﬁcial [61]. While diﬀerent
explanations seem possible, the exact cause of the low performance of bottom up compilation to SDD compared to bottom up
compilation to BDDs remains somewhat mysterious.
Summing up, our work not only improves the performance of probabilistic inference, and as such AASC evaluation beyond that,
but also sheds light on why some approaches work better than others based on a solid theoretical analysis.
10.2. Outlook
While our theoretical considerations of the diﬀerent knowledge compilation approaches give some intuition on when and why
they should be successful, the non-aligning empirical results make a further investigation desirable. In particular, the fact that PITA’s
bottom up compilation to BDDs outperforms ProbLog’s bottom up compilation to SDDs. Possible diﬀerences in the way positive
cyclic dependencies are handled may explain some of the diﬀerences but not the poor performance of this variant of ProbLog on the
blood benchmark set. That ProbLog’s implementation uses a randomly generated vtree and no dynamic variable ordering, whereas
the BDD implementation of PITA employs dynamic variable reordering may be a possible factor of the performance diﬀerence. It
seems plausible that dynamic variable reordering for SDDs is more expensive than for BDDs and thus disabled. However, it would be
interesting to explore possibilities to generate a vtree using the structure of a Boolean circuit representing the program. This seems
possible based on a tree decomposition of the Boolean circuit, given results such as Theorem 38. However, for bottom up compilation
we are unaware of work in this direction.
Apart from this, preprocessing on the program level before cycle breaking is an interesting yet unexplored topic in the context
of general AASC. The only simpliﬁcations aspmc currently uses are those that occur while clingo grounds the instance. In contrast,
40

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

ProbLog and PITA employ a wide range of simpliﬁcations: identifying relevant ground parts of the program [35], program level size
optimizations [88], and using zero/one probabilities [13]. As we have seen, they can have a signiﬁcant impact on evaluation.
While aspmc still solved the most instances overall, we can expect another signiﬁcant performance boost by combining such
preprocessing techniques and the advancements of aspmc. However, these simpliﬁcations are geared towards ProbLog programs and
not all of them trivially generalize to AASC setting, where a more general class of programs (e.g., non-stratiﬁed ones) is allowed.
It would be interesting to adopt them to the AASC setting, and possible ﬁnd new techniques, especially since preprocessing in the
context of model counting can have signiﬁcant beneﬁts [115].
An open question is also whether the double exponential upper bound of answer set counting in terms of treewidth 𝑘, proven in
[22], is tight when using treewidth as the only parameter. For checking whether some answer set exists, we know a 2(𝑘 log(𝑘)) ⋅ |Π|
upper bound that cannot be substantially improved under the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis [55], but for answer set counting
the gap remains.
Besides the aforementioned points that focus on AASC speciﬁcally, there are two open problems relevant in a bigger picture. First,
many preprocessing techniques on CNFs that contribute to the success of propositional model counters do not trivially generalize
to the weighted/algebraic setting. It would be interesting to see whether and how we can achieve an eﬃcient such generalization.
Second, it would be interesting to see whether compilation of acyclic programs can deliver faster knowledge compilation given
low incidence treewidth. Our technique using the incidence-guided version of Clark’s Completion guarantee an upper bound of
(23𝑘 ⋅ |Π|) on the time needed for model counting; however, recent work showed that model counting on a CNF 𝐶 parameterized
by incidence treewidth is feasible in (2𝑘 ⋅ 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(|𝐶|)) worst case time [116].
Beyond further eﬃciency improvements for AASC, another big open question is how aggregates [117] should be treated. While
it is in principle possible to translate programs with aggregates into ones without them that are accepted by aspmc [118,119,56],
aggregates are not available natively in aspmc. However, this approach seems to severely impede the eﬃciency of inference [81] likely
due to increases in the treewidth and the size of the encoding. To circumvent this problem, we see multiple approaches. On the one
hand, it may be possible to adapt the current translations to become treewidth-aware. Beyond that a specialized knowledge compiler
that supports aggregates as ﬁrst hand language constructs seems highly promising although likely a deeply intricate endeavor [120].
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Thomas Eiter: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision. Markus Hecher: Conceptualization,
Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Rafael Kiesel: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
All data and source is available open source.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded in whole or in part by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [10.55776/P32830, 10.55776/W1255,
10.55776/J4656]. For open access purposes, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright license to any author accepted
manuscript version arising from this submission. Further funding was given by the Society for Research Funding in Lower Austria
(GFF, Gesellschaft für Forschungsförderung NÖ) grant ExzF-0004, as well as by the Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF)
grant ICT19-065. Part of the work was carried out while Hecher was visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
Appendix A. Full proofs and auxiliary lemmas
Theorem 16. Given a normal answer set program Π and a tree decomposition  = (𝑇 , 𝜒) of INC(Π) with width 𝑘 and root 𝑡r , the CNF
IClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ) can be constructed in time linear in |Π| + |𝑇 | and satisﬁes that
(i) every model of Clark Prop (Π) can be uniquely extended to a model of IClark(Π,  , 𝑡r ),
(ii) the size of IClark(Π,  ) is in (𝑘|Π|), and
(iii) the treewidth of PRIM(IClark(Π,  , 𝑡r )) is at most 3(𝑘 + 1).
Proof. We can assume w.l.o.g. that every node 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 has at most 2 children and that 𝑇 has at most |Π| nodes. Otherwise, we
transform the tree decomposition into an equivalent one, where this is the case. This is possible in linear time in |𝑇 | [121].
⋁
⋁
In order to obtain a CNF we express every equivalence 𝑎𝑢𝑥 ↔ 𝑥∈𝑋 in Deﬁnition 15 by the clauses ¬𝑎𝑢𝑥 ∨ 𝑥∈𝑋 𝑥 and 𝑎𝑢𝑥 ∨ ¬𝑥
⋀
⋁
for 𝑥 ∈ 𝑋 . Similarly, for 𝑎𝑢𝑥 ↔ 𝑥∈𝑋 we use the clauses 𝑎𝑢𝑥 ∨ 𝑥∈𝑋 ¬𝑥 and ¬𝑎𝑢𝑥 ∨ 𝑥 for 𝑥 ∈ 𝑋 .
41

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

For 1. ﬁrst recall that the Tseitin transformation has the desired property. Then, observe that the given translation partially
applies the Tseitin transformation on the formula

𝑎↔

⋀

⋁

𝑙

𝑟∈Π,ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑(𝑟)=𝑎 𝑙∈𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦(𝑟)

for every 𝑎 ∈ (Π). Since Clark’s Completion is the conjunction of the above formula for every 𝑎 ∈ (Π), this proves the desired
claim.
2. follows immediately from Deﬁnition 15. We introduce one auxiliary atom 𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑑𝑟 for every rule in Π and one auxiliary atom
𝑢𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑥𝑡 for every combination 𝑥, 𝑡 such that 𝑥 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡). Last but not least, observe that we have at most six equivalences for each pair
𝑥, 𝑡 such that 𝑥 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡). Furthermore, each of these equivalences involves at most 𝑘 + 2 variables, since every node has at most two
children. Thus, the clauses corresponding to the equivalences have at most 𝑘 + 2 atoms and there are at most 6 ∗ (𝑘 + 2)2 many of
them for each node 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 . Since |𝑇 | ≤ |Π|, we are done.
In order to prove 3. we construct a tree decomposition  ′ = (𝑇 ′ , 𝜒 ′ ) of PRIM(𝐶) from the given tree decomposition of INC (Π).
Namely, we assume that 𝜒(𝑡) = {𝑥𝑡1 , … , 𝑥𝑡|𝜒(𝑡)| } and use 𝑇 ′ = (𝑉 ′ , 𝐸 ′ ), where

𝑉 ′ = {(𝑡, 𝑖) ∣ 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑖 = 1, … , |𝜒(𝑡)|}
𝐸 ′ = {((𝑡, 𝑖 + 1), (𝑡, 𝑖)) ∣ 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 , 𝑖 = 1, … , |𝜒(𝑡)| − 1}
∪ {((𝑡, 1), (𝑡′ , |𝜒(𝑡′ )|)) ∣ (𝑡, 𝑡′ ) ∈ 𝐸}
and

𝜒 ′ (𝑡, 𝑖) =𝜒(𝑡) ∩ (Π) ∪ {𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑑𝑟 ∣ 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)}
𝑥𝑡

𝑥𝑡

∪ {𝑢𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑡′𝑗 ∣ 𝑡′ ∈ 𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑙𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑛(𝑡), 𝑥𝑡𝑗 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡′ ), 𝑗 ≥ 𝑖} ∪ {𝑢𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑡 𝑗 ∣ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑖}.
Then, it holds that

|𝜒 ′ (𝑡, 𝑖)| = |𝜒(𝑡) ∩ (Π)| + |{𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑑𝑟 ∣ 𝑟 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)}|
𝑥𝑡

𝑥𝑡

+ |{𝑢𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑡′𝑗 ∣ 𝑡′ ∈ 𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑙𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑛(𝑡), 𝑥𝑡𝑗 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡′ ), 𝑗 ≥ 𝑖}| + |{𝑢𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑡 𝑗 ∣ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑖}|
≤ |𝜒(𝑡)| + 2(𝑘 + 1 − 𝑖 + 1) + 𝑖
≤ 3(𝑘 + 1) + 1.
Therefore, the width of  ′ is less or equal to 3(𝑘 + 1). Furthermore,  ′ is a tree decomposition of PRIM(𝐶), since for each equivalence
in Deﬁnition 15 there is a bag that contains all the variables that occur in it. □
Lemma 18 (Faithfulness Implies Query Invariance). Let 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩ be a measure and let (.) be a faithful cycle breaking for Π. Then,
for 𝜇 ′ = ⟨(Π), 𝛼, ⟩ it holds that 𝜇(𝑎) = 𝜇 ′ (𝑎) for every 𝑎 ∈ (Π).
Proof. In the proof of Theorem 25 we see that for each interpretation  ⊆ (Π) there can exist at most one answer set 𝑒𝑥𝑡 of
T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) such that  = (Π) ∩ 𝑒𝑥𝑡 . Therefore, if T -unfolding is faithful for Π and 𝑠 we see that either  is an answer set
of Π and there exists exactly one answer set 𝑒𝑥𝑡 of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) such that  = (Π) ∩ 𝑒𝑥𝑡 or  is not an answer set of Π and
there does not exist an answer set 𝑒𝑥𝑡 of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) such that  = (Π) ∩ 𝑒𝑥𝑡 . Further, this implies that if 𝑒𝑥𝑡 is an answer
set of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠), then  = (Π) ∩ 𝑒𝑥𝑡 is an answer set of Π.
Now let 𝑎 ∈ (Π). We know that 𝜇 ′ (𝑎) is the sum of 𝛼  (𝑒𝑥𝑡 ) over all answer sets 𝑒𝑥𝑡 of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠). Since 𝛼 contains
only variables in (Π) it holds that 𝛼  (𝑒𝑥𝑡 ) = 𝛼  (𝑒𝑥𝑡 ∩ (Π)). However,  = 𝑒𝑥𝑡 ∩ (Π) is guaranteed to be an answer set of
Π. Together with our previous observations it follows 𝜇′ (𝑎) = 𝜇(𝑎). □
Theorem 20. There is a family of programs (Π𝑛 )𝑛∈ℕ such that
1. DEP(Π𝑛 ) has exactly one simple cycle,
2. the treewidth of Π𝑛 is bounded by a constant (independent of 𝑛),
3. the number of atoms and rules of Π𝑛 is linear in 𝑛, and
4. the treewidth of MJ(Π𝑛 ) grows linearly with 𝑛.
Proof. For this, we deﬁne

Π𝑛 ={{𝑣(𝑖)} ←∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛}
∪ {{𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗)} ←∣ 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗

mod 𝑛}
42

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

∪ {𝑖𝑛(𝑖) ← 𝑣(𝑖) ∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛}
∪ {𝑖𝑛(𝑖) ← 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗), 𝑖𝑛(𝑗) ∣ 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗

mod 𝑛}.

Intuitively, Π𝑛 takes the directed graph over 𝑛 vertices with arcs

(1, 2), (2, 3), … , (𝑛 − 1, 𝑛), (𝑛, 1),
thus inducing exactly one cycle 1, 2, … , 𝑛, 1. Then, it guesses a random subset of it. All vertices are kept such that 𝑣(𝑖) holds or the
edge of the predecessor is present 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗) and the vertex 𝑗 was kept.
For all 𝑛 it holds that DEP(Π𝑛 ) has exactly one simple cycle, namely

𝑖𝑛(1), 𝑖𝑛(2), … , 𝑖𝑛(𝑛), 𝑖𝑛(1).
In order to prove that the treewidth of PRIM (Π𝑛 ) is bounded by a constant, we deﬁne a tree decomposition (𝑇𝑛 , 𝜒𝑛 ) as follows:

𝑇𝑛 = (𝑉𝑛 , 𝐸𝑛 ),
𝑉𝑛 = {𝑡𝑖 ∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛},
𝐸𝑛 = {(𝑡𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖+1 ) ∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 − 1},
{
{𝑣(𝑖), 𝑛𝑣(𝑖), 𝑖𝑛(𝑖), 𝑖𝑛(𝑖 + 1), 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑖 + 1), 𝑛𝑒(𝑖, 𝑖 + 1), 𝑖𝑛(1)}
𝜒𝑛 (𝑡𝑖 ) =
{𝑣(𝑛), 𝑛𝑣(𝑛), 𝑖𝑛(𝑛), 𝑖𝑛(1), 𝑒(𝑛, 1), 𝑛𝑒(𝑛, 1)}

if 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 − 1,
if 𝑖 = 𝑛.

First note that (𝑇𝑛 , 𝜒𝑛 ) is a tree decomposition of PRIM(Π), since every rule is contained in a bag completely and every subgraph of
𝑇𝑛 induced by taking only those vertices 𝑡𝑖 whose bag contains an atom 𝑎 is connected. Furthermore, the width of (𝑇𝑛 , 𝐸𝑛 ) is 6 and
therefore bounded by a constant independent of 𝑛.
It remains to show that the treewidth of PRIM (MJ(Π𝑛 )) grows linearly with 𝑛. For this, we ﬁrst construct the program MJ(Π𝑛 ):

{{{𝑣(𝑖)} ←∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛}
∪ {{𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗)} ∣ 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗

mod 𝑛}

∪ {𝑖𝑛(𝑖)𝐹 ← 𝑣(𝑖) ∣ 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝐹 ∈ ch𝑖 }
∪ {𝑖𝑛(𝑖)𝐹 ← 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗), 𝑖𝑛(𝑗)𝐹 ∪{𝑖𝑛(𝑖)} ∣ 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗 mod 𝑛, 𝐹 ∈ ch𝑖 },
where ch𝑖 denotes the set of chains of atoms that can be used to derive in(𝑖), given by

{∅,{𝑖𝑛(𝑖 − 1)}, {𝑖𝑛(𝑖 − 1), 𝑖𝑛(𝑖 − 2)}, … ,
{𝑖𝑛(𝑖 − 1), … , 𝑖𝑛(1), 𝑖𝑛(𝑛), … , 𝑖𝑛(𝑖 + 1)}}.
Then, the primal graph of MJ(Π𝑛 ) contains at least the following edges:
1. {𝑖𝑛(𝑖)𝐹 , 𝑖𝑛(𝑗)𝐹 ∪{𝑖𝑛(𝑖)} } for 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 and 𝐹 ∈ ch𝑖 such that 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗 mod 𝑛 and 𝑖𝑛(𝑗) ∉ 𝐹 , and
2. {𝑖𝑛(𝑖)𝐹 , 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗)} for 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑛 and 𝐹 ∈ ch𝑖 such that 𝑖 + 1 ≡ 𝑗 mod 𝑛 and 𝑖𝑛(𝑗) ∉ 𝐹 .
In order to show lower bounds on the width of every tree decomposition of the primal graph, we need the following two facts:
Min degree lower bound [94] The treewidth of a graph 𝐺 is at least its smallest node degree, i.e.

min |{𝑣′ ∣ {𝑣, 𝑣′ } ∈ 𝐸(𝐺)}|.

𝑣∈𝑉 (𝐺)

Minor monotonicity [73] Given a graph 𝐺 , the treewidth of any graph minor 𝐺′ of 𝐺 , i.e. a graph obtained from 𝐺 by deleting
vertices or edges or by contracting edges, is at most as high as the treewidth of 𝐺 .
This means that it is suﬃcient to show that there is a graph minor of the primal graph of Π𝑛 such that the minimum degree of a
vertex in it is in Ω(𝑛).
We proceed as follows. First, we contract all the edges of the ﬁrst form. Since, we have for each 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 an edge sequence

{𝑖𝑛(𝑖)∅ , 𝑖𝑛(𝑖 + 1){𝑖𝑛(𝑖)} },
{𝑖𝑛(𝑖 + 1){𝑖𝑛(𝑖)} , 𝑖𝑛(𝑖 + 2){𝑖𝑛(𝑖),𝑖𝑛(𝑖+1)} }, … , {𝑖𝑛(𝑖 − 2)𝐹 , 𝑖𝑛(𝑖 − 1)𝐹 ∪{𝑖𝑛(𝑖−2)} }
that we contract, the vertex 𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑖) resulting from contracting it has neighbors

{𝑒(𝑖′ , 𝑗 ′ ) ∣ 𝑖′ , 𝑗 ′ = 1, … , 𝑛, 𝑖′ ≠ 𝑖, 𝑖′ + 1 ≡ 𝑗 ′

mod 𝑛}

due to the second kind of edges.
43

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Similarly, 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑖 + 1) for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛 − 1 has neighbors {𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑖′ ) ∣ 𝑖′ ≠ 𝑖 + 1}. Thus, if we remove every other vertex that is not of the
form 𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑖) or 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗), then every vertex in the remaining graph minor has at least 𝑛 − 1 neighbors. From the min-degree lower bound
it follows that the primal graph of MJ(Π𝑛 ) has treewidth at least 𝑛 − 1. □
Theorem 21. Let Π be a normal answer set program of treewidth 𝑘 such that the largest strongly connected component of DEP(Π) has size
𝑠. Then, the treewidth of JN(Π) is in (𝑘2 + 𝑘 log2 (𝑠)).
Proof. Let (𝑇 , 𝜒) be an optimal tree decomposition of PRIM(Π). We can modify it to be a tree decomposition of PRIM(JN(Π)),
resulting in (𝑇 ′ , 𝜒 ′ ), where

𝑇 ′ =𝑇 ,

⋃

𝜒 ′ (𝑡) =𝜒(𝑡) ∪ {𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(𝑎), 𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(𝑎) ∣ 𝑎 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)} ∪

bin(𝑎)

𝑎∈𝜒(𝑡)

∪{𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎), 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(𝑏, 𝑎) ∣ 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡), 𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎) ∈ (JN(Π))}.
Here, bin(𝑎) refers to the set of variables that are used to encode the binary counter for 𝑎 ∈ (Π). For each 𝑎 ∈ (Π) there are at
most ⌈log2 (𝑠)⌉ such variables.
Observe that the width upper bound holds, since

|𝜒 ′ (𝑡)| = |𝜒(𝑡)| + |{𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(𝑎), 𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(𝑎) ∣ 𝑎 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)}| +

∑

|bin(𝑎)|

𝑎∈𝜒(𝑡)

+ |{𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎), 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(𝑏, 𝑎) ∣ 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡), 𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎) ∈ (JN(Π))}|
≤ 𝑘 + 𝑘 + 𝑘⌈log2 (𝑠)⌉ + 𝑘2
The last expression is in (𝑘2 + 𝑘 log2 (𝑠)), as claimed.
It remains to show that (𝑇 ′ , 𝜒 ′ ) is a tree decomposition of PRIM(JN(Π)). This follows form the fact that (𝑇 , 𝜒) is a tree decomposition of PRIM(Π). Therefore, for every rule 𝑟 ∈ Π there exists a bag 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 such that ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑(𝑟) ∪ 𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦(𝑟) ⊆ 𝜒(𝑡). In JN(Π) we only add
rules that are based on an original rule 𝑟 ∈ Π, meaning that they only use atoms from 𝑟 or auxiliary atoms that are related to atoms
in 𝑟. i.e. when an additional rule uses any of 𝐧𝐞𝐱𝐭(𝑎), 𝐣𝐮𝐬𝐭(𝑎), 𝐥𝐭(𝑏, 𝑎) or 𝐬𝐮𝐜𝐜(𝑏, 𝑎) then both 𝑎 and 𝑏 must occur in 𝑟. Since we deﬁned
𝜒 ′ (𝑡) in such a way that it includes all auxiliary atoms that are related to the atoms in 𝜒(𝑡) this means all additional rules derived
from a rule 𝑟 are completely contained in 𝜒 ′ (𝑡), when 𝑟 is completely contained in 𝜒(𝑡). □
Lemma 24. Let Π be an answer set program and 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ be an unfolding sequence. Then, UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠) = DEP(T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠))
(when identifying 𝑎 with 𝑎cnt(𝑎,𝑠) ).
Proof. We proof this lemma by induction on the length of 𝑠. If |𝑠| = 0, then the program T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) contains only constraints
and thus DEP(T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠)) is the empty digraph. On the other hand, UF (DEP(Π), 𝑠) is also equal to the empty digraph.
Next, we prove the induction step. Assume the lemma holds for all 𝑠 of length up to 𝑛. Now let 𝑠 = 𝑠′ 𝑠𝑛+1 an unfolding sequence
of length 𝑛 + 1. Then, T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) is equal to the union of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠′ ) and the rules that were added in the 𝑛 + 1-th
𝑐𝑛𝑡(𝑠

)

iteration (modulo renaming of 𝑠𝑛+1 𝑛+1 to 𝑠𝑛+1 ). Thus we can apply the induction hypothesis and obtain that
DEP(T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠′ )) = UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠′ ).
We now consider the additional rules that were added in the 𝑛+1-th iteration. Then
𝑐𝑛𝑡(𝑠

)

𝑉 (DEP(T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠))) = 𝑉 (DEP(T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠′ ))) ∪ {𝑠𝑛+1 𝑛+1 }
𝑐𝑛𝑡(𝑠

)

= 𝑉 (UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠′ )) ∪ {𝑠𝑛+1 𝑛+1 }
= 𝑉 (UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠)).
Furthermore, the edges that are added to the dependency graph after the 𝑛 + 1-th iteration are of the form (𝑏, 𝑠𝑛+1 ) for (𝑏, 𝑠𝑛+1 ) ∈
𝐸(DEP(Π)), since we only add rules that derive 𝑠𝑛+1 and because we only add rule copies (see line 10). On the other hand, if (1)
(𝑏, 𝑠𝑛+1 ) ∈ 𝐸(DEP(Π)) and (2) 𝑏 occurred in 𝑠′ , then we add an edge (𝑏, 𝑠𝑛+1 ) as (1) implies that there is a rule that uses 𝑏 to derive
𝑠𝑛+1 and (2) implies that a copy of the rule is added that has 𝑏 in the body (as 𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑏) = 𝑏). This exactly correspond to the edges that
we deﬁne to be in 𝐸(UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠)) for 𝑘 = 𝑛 + 1. □
Theorem 25. Let Π be an answer set program and 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ be an unfolding sequence. If for every simple directed path 𝜋 = (𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑛 ) in
𝑐
𝑐
DEP(Π) some directed path 𝜋𝑐 = (𝑎11 , … , 𝑎𝑛𝑛 ) in UF(DEP(Π), 𝑠) exists, then T -U NFOLD (., 𝑠) is faithful for Π.
Proof. Let Π be an answer set program, 𝑠 an unfolding sequence that satisﬁes the precondition of the theorem and  ⊆ (Π). We
know that for all 𝑠 the reduct T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠)𝑒𝑥𝑡 for 𝑒𝑥𝑡 ∩ (Π) =  is T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) as the rules added in line 12 use the
44

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

original negative body 𝐵 − (𝑟), which only uses atoms from (Π). Hence we can consider T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) , which has a unique
minimal model. We see that if T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) has an answer set 𝑒𝑥𝑡 equal to  on (Π), then it is the only such answer set.
By the same argument we see, that taking the reduct w.r.t.  and T -Unfolding commute: T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) = T -U NFOLD(Π , 𝑠).
Since  is an answer set iﬀ it is a minimal model of the reduct Π , it remains to show that 𝑎 ∈ (Π) is derivable from Π iﬀ it is
derivable from T -U NFOLD(Π , 𝑠). Since both programs are positive, 𝑎 is derivable iﬀ it has an SLD tree. W.l.o.g. we can assume an
SLD tree such that every path from the root to a leaf if simple. However, we know that 𝑠 preserves all simple paths and since the
paths in every SLD tree correspond to paths in DEP(Π), we know there exists a corresponding SLD-tree in T -U NFOLD(Π , 𝑠). □
Theorem 22. For any factorized measure 𝜇 = ⟨Π, 𝛼, ⟩, we can construct in polynomial time in the size of Π given access to an NP-oracle
a factorized measure 𝜇 ′ = ⟨Π′ , 𝛼, ⟩ with an acyclic program Π′ such that
(i) for all 𝑎 ∈ (Π) it holds that 𝜇(𝑎) = 𝜇 ′ (𝑎),
(ii) the treewidth of Π′ is at most 𝑘 ⋅ cbs(DEP(Π)), where 𝑘 is the treewidth of Π, and
(iii) the size of Π′ is at most cbs(DEP(Π)) ⋅ |Π|.
For the proof we use the following auxiliary lemma.
Lemma 26. Let Π be an answer set program with treewidth 𝑘 and 𝑠 ∈ (Π)∗ be an unfolding sequence. If every variable 𝑎 ∈ (Π) occurs
at most 𝑚 times in 𝑠, then the treewidth of T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠) is less or equal to 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑚.
Proof. We know that for each variable 𝑎 ∈ (Π) we introduce at most 𝑚 − 1 copies 𝑎1 , … , 𝑎𝑚−1 during unfolding. Now, let (𝑇 , 𝜒)
be an optimal tree decomposition for Π. We take (𝑇 , 𝜒 ′ ), where

𝜒 ′ (𝑡) = 𝜒(𝑡) ∪ {𝑎𝑗 ∣ 1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑚 − 1, 𝑎 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡)}.
Recall line 11 of Algorithm 1, which is the only line where rules are added to the output program Π′ . We see that for each such
+ , 𝐵 − (𝑟) added at the iteration where we consider 𝑠 , it holds that ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 is either a copy of 𝑠 or 𝑠 itself. The same
rule head ← 𝐵𝑛𝑒𝑤
𝑖
𝑖
𝑖
+ . For 𝐵 − (𝑟) we even only have the original atoms.
holds for the atoms in 𝐵𝑛𝑒𝑤
The ﬁrst condition for (𝑇 , 𝜒 ′ ) to be a tree decomposition is easily seen to be true. We know that (𝑇 , 𝜒) is a tree decomposition for
PRIM(Π), therefore, every atom 𝑎 ∈ (Π) is in 𝜒(𝑡𝑎 ). Accordingly, since (T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠)) only contains the original atoms 𝑎 or
copies 𝑎𝑖 we know that 𝑎, 𝑎𝑖 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡𝑎 ).
Next we must check that for every edge {𝑥, 𝑦} in the primal graph of T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠) there is a node 𝑡 such that 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝜒 ′ (𝑡).
Again, we know that for every edge {𝑥, 𝑦} ∈ 𝐸(Π) there is a node 𝑡𝑥,𝑦 such that 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝜒(𝑡𝑥,𝑦 ). Furthermore, we know that there is
an edge between 𝑥 and 𝑦 if they both occur in the same rule. Since the rules in T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠) are all copies of rules with copies
of atoms, we know that if {𝑥, 𝑦} ∈ 𝐸(PRIM(T -U NFOLD(Π, 𝑠))), where the original atom of 𝑥 and 𝑦 are 𝑎 and 𝑏 respectively, then
{𝑎, 𝑏} ∈ 𝐸(PRIM(Π)). It follows that 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝜒 ′ (𝑡𝑎,𝑏 ).
Last but not least, since the subgraphs induced by removing all bags that do not contain a variable 𝑎 are trees in the original tree
decomposition, this also holds for the new tree decomposition. Thus, (𝑇 , 𝜒 ′ ) is a tree decomposition of T -U NFOLD (Π, 𝑠).
Further, it is easy to see that |𝜒 ′ (𝑡)| ≤ |𝜒(𝑡)| ⋅ 𝑚 ≤ 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑚. □
Theorem 29. The problem of checking whether cbs(𝐺) ≤ 𝑘 given a digraph 𝐺 and 𝑘 ∈ ℕ in the input is NP-complete.
Proof. NP-membership is easy to see by a guess and check algorithm.
For NP-hardness, we use a reduction from SAT, i.e. checking whether a CNF  has a satisfying assignment. We assume w.l.o.g.
that  does not have any empty clauses. We construct a digraph 𝐺 with two vertices 𝑣𝑥 and 𝑣¬𝑥 for each variable 𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑠() and
its negation ¬𝑥 and one vertex 𝑣𝐶 for each clause 𝐶 . Then we add arcs to include a cycle between 𝑣𝑥 and 𝑣¬𝑥 for every variable 𝑥,
in addition to one cycle 𝑣𝑙1 … 𝑣𝑙𝑛 𝑣𝐶 for each clause 𝐶 = 𝑙1 ∨ … 𝑣𝑛 ∈  .
Claim I: Let 𝑁 = |𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑠()|. There exists a subset 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺) such that 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is acyclic of size 𝑁 iﬀ the original CNF was satisﬁable.
This can be seen as follows: Every subset 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺) such that 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is acyclic must have a size of at least 𝑁 , since for each
variable we need to at least include 𝑥 or 𝑥
∕ in 𝑆 . Since we additionally have a cycle 𝑣𝑙1 … 𝑣𝑙𝑛 𝑣𝐶 for each clause 𝐶 = 𝑙1 ∨ … 𝑣𝑛 ∈ 
every satisfying assignment  to  corresponds to a set

𝑆 = {𝑣𝑙 ∣  ⊧ 𝑙, 𝑙 = 𝑥, ¬𝑥, 𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑠()}
that satisﬁes 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is acyclic. And additionally for every 𝑆 of size 𝑁 (implying that 𝑆 only contains vertices of the form 𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣¬𝑥 )
such that 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is acyclic, it holds that

𝑆 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑠() ∣ 𝑣𝑥 ∈ 𝑆}
is a satisfying assignment to  . This proves the claim.
However, cbs(𝐺) does not ask for the minimum size of a backdoor 𝑆 such that 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is acyclic. We can however force every minimum solution for cbs(𝐺) to be of that form by performing an additional modiﬁcation on 𝐺 . Namely, we add vertices
45

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

𝐶3

𝑥3

𝐶1

𝑥2

𝑥1
𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎1

¬𝑥3

¬𝑥2

𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎2

𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎3

¬𝑥1

𝐶2
Fig. A.13. The digraph 𝐺 constructed in the proof of Theorem 29 for the CNF  = {𝐶1 , 𝐶2 , 𝐶3 } with 𝐶1 = 𝑥1 ∨ 𝑥2 , 𝐶2 = ¬𝑥2 ∨ ¬𝑥3 , and 𝐶3 = 𝑥1 ∨ ¬𝑥3 . Note that the
edges between 𝑥𝑖 (resp. ¬𝑥𝑖 ) and 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑗 are by intent drawn in an overlapping manner to improve readability.

𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎1 , … , 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑁 and arcs (𝑣𝑥 , 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖 ), (𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖 , 𝑣¬𝑥 ) for every 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁} and 𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑠(). An example is shown in Fig. A.13.
Observe that Claim I still holds for the modiﬁed graph, since every added cycle uses both 𝑣𝑥 and 𝑣¬𝑥 , thus, removing either of them
suﬃces.
Claim II: Let 𝐺 denote constructed graph. cbs(𝐺 ) ≤ 𝑁 + 1 iﬀ  is satisﬁable.
By proving this claim the reduction is completed. We already know that if  is satisﬁable, then some set 𝑆 exists such that
𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is acyclic and thus by case (i) and (iv) of the deﬁnition of cbs(.) we have cbs(𝐺 ) = 𝑁 + 1, as desired. Assume now that
cbs(𝐺 ) ≤ 𝑁 + 1. As  contains no empty clauses, 𝐺 is cyclic, strongly connected, and not a polytree (due to the extra vertices and
arcs). Thus, we are in case (iv) of the deﬁnition of cbs(.) meaning we compute it by choosing 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 (𝐺 ) and multiplying cbs(𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆)
by (|𝑆| + 1); hence |𝑆| ≤ 𝑁 . Consider now the following three observations:
1. for {𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣¬𝑥 } and {𝑣𝑦 , 𝑣¬𝑦 } to lie in diﬀerent SCCs of 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 without using vertices of the from {𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣¬𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 , 𝑣¬𝑦 } for 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑠(),
𝑆 needs to be at least of size 𝑁 since it needs to include all vertices 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖 for 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁 ;
2. for 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 to be a polytree and |𝑆| ≤ 𝑁 , the set 𝑆 needs to include at least 𝑁 ; and
3. for 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 to be acyclic and |𝑆| ≤ 𝑁 , the set 𝑆 needs to include 𝑣𝑥 or 𝑣¬𝑥 for each 𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑠().
This means that we either need to remove a set 𝑆 such that 𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is cyclic but not strongly connected or a set 𝑆 of size 𝑁 such that
𝐺 ⧵ 𝑆 is acyclic. The latter would imply that  is satisﬁable and the former is impossible, since due to (1.) we would need 𝑆 of size
at least 𝑁 to obtain 𝑁 diﬀerent SCCs and using a set of size 𝑘 to obtain less than 𝑘 + 1 diﬀerent SCCs is not helpful, since analogous
observations hold for the obtained SCCs. □
Appendix B. Knowledge compilation for AASC
Here, we discuss in detail the diﬀerent possible strategies that are currently employed to compile programs into tractable circuit representations. For this, we ﬁrst recall the diﬀerent circuit classes that are commonly used in the area of probabilistic logic
programming and their associated theoretical guarantees.
B.1. Theoretical guarantees
A very simple circuit class is the MODS representation.
Deﬁnition 34 (MODS). A logical theory  over propositional variables  is a MODS theory, if it is of the form

⋁

⋀

⊆,⊧ 𝑣∈

𝑣∧

⋀

¬𝑣,

𝑣∈⧵

i.e. if it is a disjunction of its models, where each model is represented by the conjunction of its true literals.
Clearly, given a theory  in MODS representation tasks like probabilistic inference are possible in polynomial time in the size of
the input  . However, the example of MODS also has obvious downsides: converting a program Π into an equivalent propositional
theory  in MODS representation can result in a theory whose size is exponential in the one of Π, since we need one disjunct in 
46

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

∨
∧

∧

𝑐

¬𝑐

∧
𝑑

∧

∨

∨
𝑎

∧

𝑑

∨
¬𝑎

𝑏

∨
∧

¬𝑑

∧

𝑎

¬𝑏

∨
𝑏

𝑏

∨
¬𝑏

𝑎

¬𝑎

Fig. B.14. An sd-DNNFs for 𝐶 = 𝑎 ∨ 𝑏 ∨ 𝑐 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∨ 𝑑 .

for every answer set of Π. Thus, the size guarantee for the MODS representation of a program is rather weak, if it has many answer
sets.
Corollary 35 (Size of MODS). Let Π be an answer set program. The smallest MODS representation of Π has size Θ(|(Π)| ⋅ |(Π)|).
Example 19. Consider the CNF

𝐶 = 𝑎 ∨ 𝑏 ∨ 𝑐 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∨ 𝑑.
It can be represented in MODS as follows:

∨
∨
∨
∨
𝐶≡
∨
∨
∨
∨
∨

𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 ∧ 𝑐 ∧ 𝑑
𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∧ 𝑑
𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∧ ¬𝑑
𝑎 ∧ ¬𝑏 ∧ 𝑐 ∧ 𝑑
𝑎 ∧ ¬𝑏 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∧ 𝑑
𝑎 ∧ ¬𝑏 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∧ ¬𝑑
¬𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 ∧ 𝑐 ∧ 𝑑
¬𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∧ 𝑑
¬𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 ∧ ¬𝑐 ∧ ¬𝑑
¬𝑎 ∧ ¬𝑏 ∧ 𝑐 ∧ 𝑑

There are also other more intricate tractable circuit representations, which may be exponentially smaller and more importantly
allow for size guarantees with respect to structural parameters such as treewidth.
One of the most prominent tractable circuit representations is sd-DNNF. It is a special case of negation normal form (NNF) [46].
The latter is a rooted directed acyclic graph in which each leaf node is labeled with either a literal, “true”, or “false”, and each
internal node is labeled with a conjunction ∧ or a disjunction ∨. For any node 𝑛 in an NNF graph, Vars(𝑛) denotes all variables in
the subgraph rooted at 𝑛. In abuse of notation, we refer by 𝑛 also to the formula represented by the graph 𝑛. sd-DNNF in NNF that
satisﬁes the following additional properties (D), (d), and (s):
Decomposability (D): Vars(𝑛𝑖 ) ∩ Vars(𝑛𝑗 ) = ∅ for any two children 𝑛𝑖 and 𝑛𝑗 of an and-node.
Determinism (d): 𝑛𝑖 ∧ 𝑛𝑗 is logically inconsistent for any distinct children 𝑛𝑖 and 𝑛𝑗 of an or-node.
Smoothness (s): Vars(𝑛𝑖 ) = Vars(𝑛𝑗 ) for any two children 𝑛𝑖 and 𝑛𝑗 of an or-node.
Example 20 (cont.). The NNF in Fig. B.14 is an sd-DNNF and equivalent to 𝐶 . We observe that for each and-node, labeled ∧ in the
ﬁgure, the sets of variables that occur for the diﬀerent children are disjoint. The NNFs of the form 𝑎 ∨ ¬𝑎 are necessary for the circuit
to be smooth. Notably, in this sd-DNNF the NNF 𝑎 ∨ ¬𝑎 occurs twice. This is not necessary as NNFs can be DAGs. Thus, we could also
point two arrows to the same NNF 𝑎 ∨ ¬𝑎.
A big selling point of sd-DNNFs is the ﬁxed-parameter-tractability (FPT) result that gives a guarantee on the size and time needed
to construct it.
Theorem 36 (Size of sd-DNNF [48]). Let 𝐶 be a CNF and (𝑇 , 𝜒) a tree decomposition of PRIM(𝐶), the primal graph of 𝐶 , with width 𝑘.
Then, there is an equivalent sd-DNNF of size (2𝑘 |𝐶|), which can be constructed in time (2𝑘 poly(|𝐶|)) from 𝐶 and (𝑇 , 𝜒).
This theorem even holds for a more restricted class of sd-DNNFs, namely Sentential Decision Diagrams (SDD).
47

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

0
𝑐

1
𝑑

2
𝑎

𝑏

Fig. B.15. A (right-linear) vtree for the SDD in Fig. B.14.

Deﬁnition 37 (Vtree, SDD [43]). Let  be a ﬁnite set of propositional variables. A vtree for  is a rooted binary tree 𝑇 = (𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡 ),
whose leaves are labeled by variables from  in a one-to-one manner. Given 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 , we denote by Vars(𝑡) the set of labels of leafs
that occur in 𝑇 below 𝑡.
An SDD is a d-DNNF 𝐶 such that every and-node of 𝐶 has exactly two children, and there exists a vtree 𝑇 such that for each
and-node 𝑛 = 𝑛1 ∧ 𝑛2 there exists a vertex 𝑡 in 𝑇 with children 𝑡1 and 𝑡2 such that Vars(𝑛𝑖 ) ⊆ Vars(𝑡𝑖 ), 𝑖 = 1, 2.
Example 21 (cont.). The sd-DNNF is in fact also an SDD for the CNF 𝐶 . This is witnessed by the vtree displayed in Fig. B.15.
To the best of our knowledge, it is unknown whether for each sd-DNNF 𝐶 an equivalent SDD 𝐶 ′ of size polynomial in |𝐶| exists,
meaning that it may be possible that sd-DNNFs can be much smaller than SDDs for some propositional theories. However, their
structuredness gives us other additional possibilities. Given two SDDs 𝐶1 , 𝐶2 that are structured by the same vtree 𝑇 , there is an
operator APPLY, which computes an SDD 𝐶3 that is equivalent to 𝐶1 ∧ 𝐶2 (or 𝐶1 ∨ 𝐶2 ) and structured by 𝑇 in polynomial time
in the size of 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 [43]. This allows us to compile an SDD for a Boolean circuit without introducing auxiliary variables for
the and-nodes and or-nodes (as it usually happens, when we apply the Tseitin Transformation to the circuit to obtain a CNF). This
strategy allows for a diﬀerent size guarantee.
Theorem 38 (Size of SDD [49]). Let 𝐶 be a Boolean circuit and (𝑇 , 𝜒) be a tree decomposition of 𝐶 with width 𝑘. Then, there is an SDD

(

(𝑘+2)2𝑘+1 +1 +1

that is equivalent to 𝐶 , whose size is in  22

)
⋅ |Vars(𝐶)| .

Importantly, the size of the circuit here is linear in the number of input variables of the Boolean circuit 𝐶 , rather than the size of
the CNF of Theorem 36. On the other hand, the dependency on the treewidth 𝑘 is triple exponential, rather than(single exponential.)
4(𝑘+1) ⋅ |Vars(𝐶)|
It is not clear whether this is necessary.
( In fact, Amarilli
) et al. [52] were able to obtain a size upper bound of  2
that is constructive, with time bound  25𝑘 ⋅ |Vars(𝐶)| , by dropping the requirements that vtrees are binary and that and-nodes
should only have two children.
Another similar class that also features an APPLY operator is that of Binary Decision Diagrams (BDD). They can be deﬁned as a
special case of SDDs.13
Deﬁnition 39 (BDD [122]). A BDD is an SDD that is structured by a right-linear vtree 𝑇 , meaning that for every non-leaf node of 𝑇
it holds that its left child is a variable.
Example 22 (cont.). Since the vtree in Fig. B.15 is right-linear, the SDD in Fig. B.14 is also a BDD.
Intuitively, the restriction on the vtree to be right-linear takes away our possibility to decompose problems of the form 𝐶 =
𝐶1 ∧ 𝐶2 , where 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 are CNFs that do not share variables, into the two subproblems 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 . For SDDs and sd-DNNFs we
can solve them independently and obtain a solution for the whole CNF 𝐶 . Accordingly, BDDs come with a weaker FPT result than
SDDs and sd-DNNFs.
Theorem 40 (Size of BDDs I [50]). Let 𝐶 be a CNF and (𝑇 , 𝜒) be a path decomposition of PRIM(𝐶), the primal graph of 𝐶 , with width 𝑘.
Then, there is an equivalent BDD of size (2𝑘 |𝐶|), which can be constructed in time (2𝑘 poly(|𝐶|)) from 𝐶 and (𝑇 , 𝜒).
Note that here the guarantee is only given in terms of pathwidth instead of treewidth, which is a weaker parameter.
As with SDDs, we have a separate result for the compilation of Boolean circuits of bounded pathwidth.
Theorem 41 (Size of BDDs II [51,52]). Let 𝐶 be a Boolean circuit and (𝑇 , 𝜒) be a path decomposition of 𝐶 with width 𝑘. Then, there is an
𝑘+2
𝑘+2
equivalent BDD of size (2(𝑘+2)⋅2 ⋅ |Vars(𝐶)|), which can be constructed in time (2(𝑘+2)⋅2 ⋅ poly(|𝐶|)) from 𝐶 and (𝑇 , 𝜒).

13

Strictly speaking these BDDs are known as Ordered BDDs (OBDDs).
48

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

Here in contrast to the same result for SDDs the dependency on the parameter 𝑘 is double exponential rather than triple exponential. Arguably, pathwidth is a weaker parameter than treewidth, however only by at most a logarithmic factor in the number of
vertices of the given graph [123]. In addition, since every BDD can be interpreted as an SDD, we also have the same guarantee for
SDDs. Again, to the best of our knowledge it is not known whether the double exponential bound is tight [52].
This short summary of diﬀerent circuit classes and known results that guarantee eﬃcient compilation can serve us as a basis for
judging diﬀerent knowledge compilation based approaches to AASC. Of course, we still need to keep in mind that these theoretical
guarantees may not be optimal, especially not on every instance, and that the Big-O notation hides constant factors. Furthermore,
the practical eﬃciency also depends on how well engineered the used knowledge compilers are. Apart from this, these theoretical
results are only used by some knowledge compilers practically, meaning that we may even end up with worse performance. Thus,
these results should not be taken as the sole basis for choosing a knowledge compilation strategy but can at least serve as an indicator
from the theoretical perspective.
B.2. Diﬀerent approaches to the knowledge compilation step
In this section, we compare the diﬀerent approaches to the knowledge compilation step in the overall pipeline of AASC based
on the theoretical guarantees from above. Note that this is not a complete discussion in the sense that every possible approach is
discussed. Instead, we only discuss approaches for which an implementation exists. Nevertheless, we still include approaches even
when their current implementation does not make use of the FPT-guarantees explicitly.
Program to MODS This approach is used by LPMLN [10] and plingo [38]. By Corollary 35, we know that this means we need to
consider each model once. Of course, ﬁnding models of a program is NP-hard but in practice this does not seem to lead to problems.
When enumerating the answer sets as it is the case in LPMLN and plingo, the size guarantee is used explicitly. In fact, it is not even
necessary to keep all the answer sets but it is suﬃcient to extract a value from each answer set and then discard it. Thus, this strategy
is promising, when there are “few” answer sets14 but becomes infeasible quickly, since the linear dependency on the number of
answer sets cannot be avoided.
Dynamic programming This approach is used by dynasp [21], which is currently specialized on counting the number of answer sets
rather than probabilistic reasoning or even general AASC. The following result is the basis for the implementation.
Theorem 42 ([21]). Let Π be a ground program and let (𝑇 , 𝜒) be a tree decomposition of the primal dependency graph of Π with width 𝑘.
𝑘+1
Then, it is possible, assuming constant time semiring additions and multiplications, to perform AASC over Π in time (22 |𝑇 |).
Since dynasp is based on dynamic programming over the tree decomposition, the guarantee is used explicitly.
CNF to sd-DNNF This approach has been widely considered and is for example available in ProbLog [58,36]. Here, we can use the
guarantees of Theorem 36, which are both in terms of size as well as time, and have the lowest (i.e. single exponential) dependency
on the treewidth of the primal graph of the input formula. In fact, in the context of CNFs the result is not only of theoretical interest,
quite on the contrary, recent results showed that using them as a primary means of guiding the variable selection during model
counting is also highly beneﬁcial in practice [47].
However, this assumes that we are given a CNF of low treewidth. A priori it is unclear whether a program of low treewidth also
leads to a CNF suitable for compilation of low treewidth. We will discuss this in depth in Sections 6 and 7.
Ground acyclic program to SDD This is the current standard approach in the implementation of ProbLog [35]. Here, we do not ﬁrst
translate the program into a CNF via Clark’s Completion but interpret the program as a Boolean circuit and obtain an SDD that
represents the truth of the extensional atoms in terms of only the input variables. In the case of probabilistic inference, these are
the probabilistic facts. Here, we obtain a triple exponential upper bound in terms of treewidth on the size of the smallest SDD via
Theorem 38 or a double exponential upper bound in terms of the pathwidth via Theorem 41. These upper bounds are not explicitly
used in the implementation of ProbLog, which employs the APPLY operator on SDDs to build the SDDs in a bottom up manner, along
the Boolean circuit. In order to keep the SDDs small, dynamic reordering of the vtree can be applied heuristically.
Recall that Theorem 36 also holds for compiling CNFs to SDDs [43]. Thus, we could also make use of its guarantees, given that
we can obtain a CNF of small treewidth from a Boolean circuit of small treewidth. On the one hand, this would lead to a single
exponential instead of a triple exponential dependency on the treewidth for the worst case guarantee. On the other hand, it would
also come with a higher remaining factor that uses the size of the CNF instead of the number of input variables.
Ground program to SDD This approach is called T -compilation [39] and is also available in the implementation of ProbLog. Since
the program is not necessarily acyclic we cannot see it as a Boolean circuit. Thus, we cannot use Theorem 38 directly to obtain
guarantees. However, the theorem in fact also holds when there exists a circuit that deﬁnes the same Boolean function as the
program [49]. Thus, we have the same theoretical guarantees here as for the acyclic case. Practically, these guarantees are not used

14

Millions of answer sets still seem to be easily feasible.
49

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

either since the APPLY operator is employed for compilation in a similar manner as before. Here, we need to make multiple passes
over the program structure, which intuitively can be seen as a cyclic version of a Boolean circuit, until convergence of the SDDs.
Program to BDD This approach is used by the PITA system [13]. A theoretical guarantee can again be derived by Theorem 41.
While the program is again not guaranteed to be acyclic, the theorem holds for any Boolean circuit that deﬁnes the Boolean function
speciﬁed by the program [50]. Thus, the worst case guarantee here is equal or worse to the one in the previous case, since we only
compile to BDD and not to SDD, which encompasses BDD as a special case. As with ProbLog, the guarantees are not used explicitly,
since BDDs are built in a bottom-up manner by empolying the APPLY operator for BDDs. The BDDs can be dynamically minimized
during compilation by heuristically adapting the variable ordering on the ﬂy.
Ground program to sd-DNNF Last but not least it is important to mention the strategy of Aziz et al. [89]. They modiﬁed the knowledge
compiler D SHARP to work on inputs that correspond to normal answer set programs. In their approach, they did not take care of
acyclicity before but during compilation by adding so called loop formulas [90], which are clauses that prohibit cyclic derivations.
This approach seems promising, since it does not need to blow up the size of the encoding with all potentially necessary acyclicity
constraints but adds them only when needed. There is a downside to it however. Loop formulas as introduced by Lin and Zhao [90]
may span a whole SCC of the dependency graph of the program.15 Thus, the primal graph of the CNF for Clark’s Completion and
all loop formulas of a program Π contains a clique for each SCC of DEP(Π). Since an SCC can potentially span large parts of the
program, this may increase the treewidth drastically compared to the treewidth of the original program. Apart from that, not only
the treewidth may suﬀer: we may end up with exponentially many additional clauses in the size of the largest SCC [91]. This version
of D SHARP was removed from the ProbLog implementation, presumably for the above reasons. While there are strategies to reduce
the number of necessary loop formulas [92,93], their adaptation would not circumvent the exponential worst case lower bound on
the number of added clauses.
Appendix C. Knowledge compilation settings
We use the diﬀerent solvers for knowledge compilation as follows:
d4 For d4, we simply used standard settings adding only the input arguments “-dDNNF”, to ensure that we obtain a d-DNNF as
output, “-out=ﬁle_name.nnf”, to ensure that the d-DNNF is saved in the desired output ﬁle, and “-smooth”, to activate our minor
modiﬁcation that ensures the resulting d-DNNF is smooth.
SHARP SAT-TD
For SHARP SAT-TD, we set the argument “-decot”, i.e. the time used by SHARP SAT-TD to compute a tree decomposition based on the corresponding input argument to aspmc. The other arguments are set as follows:

• “-decow”, speciﬁes the importance of tree decomposition guidance. We use 100.
• “-dDNNF”, is a new option that we added, and speciﬁes that we want to use SHARP SAT-TD as a knowledge compiler.
• “-tmpdir”, simply speciﬁes the temporary directory that SHARP SAT-TD should use. We use “/tmp/”.
• “-cs”, denotes the maximum size of the cache in megabyte. We ﬁx it to “3500”.
• “-dDNNF_out”, speciﬁes the ﬁlename that the d-DNNF should be written to. We set it to the name of a new temporary ﬁle.
Without the argument “-dDNNF_out” our modiﬁed version of SHARP SAT-TD prints the d-DNNF it compiles to stdout. This allows us
to perform knowledge compilation and evaluation simultaneously. While we implemented this feature in aspmc it should only lead to
a speed up by a factor of up to two and is not included in the empirical evaluation.
c2d

For c2d, we set the following input arguments:

• “-smooth_all”, speciﬁes that the ﬁnal output d-DNNF should be smooth.
• “-reduce”, speciﬁes that c2d should perform possible reduction steps before outputting the ﬁnal d-DNNF.
• “-dt_in”, speciﬁes the input dtree that should be used to guide the variable selection of c2d. While this is an optional argument,
we chose to provide a dtree that we generated ourselves.
• “-cache_size”, speciﬁes the maximum size of the cache, which we set to “3500”.
The other input arguments (apart from the CNF to compile) are not used.
miniC2D

For miniC2D, we set the following input arguments:

• “-v”, speciﬁes the input vtree that deﬁnes the order in which variables are decided by miniC2D. Similarly to the dtree argument
of c2d, this argument is optional but we chose to provide a vtree that we generated ourselves.

15

They usually contain even more variables, however already this is devastating for knowledge compilation.
50

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

• “-s”, speciﬁes the maximum size of the cache. We set it to “3500”.
The other input arguments (apart from CNF to compile) are not used.
Appendix D. Dtree and vtree generation

Algorithm 2 TD_ TO _ DTREE (𝐶, 𝑡𝑑).
Input A CNF 𝐶 and a tree decomposition 𝑡𝑑 of PRIM(𝐶).
Output A dtree for 𝐶 that corresponds to 𝑡𝑑 .
1: td_node_to_clauses = {} # at which td node the clause should be handles
2: last_td_node = {} # at which td node each variable occurs last
3: idx = 0
4: bag_idx = list(td)
5: for bag in td.bag_iter() do
6:
clauses[bag] = []
7:
bag.idx = idx
8:
for a in bag.vertices do
9:
last_td_node = idx
10:
idx += 1
11: # set where each clause should be handled
12: for i,c in enumerate(cnf.clauses) do
13:
idx = min([ last_td_node[abs(b)] for b in c ])
14:
td_node_to_clauses[bag_idx[idx]].append(i)
15: dtree_idx = [ None for _ in range(td.bags) ]
16: for bag in td.bag_iter() do
17:
cur_dtree = None
18:
for child in bag.children do
19:
child_dtree = dtree_idx[child.idx]
20:
if cur_dtree == None then
21:
cur_dtree = child_dtree
22:
else
23:
if child_dtree != None then
24:
cur_dtree = Dtree(right = cur_dtree, left = child_tree)
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:

for i in td_node_to_clauses[bag] do
if cur_dtree == None then
cur_dtree = Dtree(val = i)
else
cur_dtree = Dtree(right = cur_dtree, left = Dtree(val = i))

30:
31:

# remember the ﬁnal dtree for this bag
dtree_idx[bag.idx] = cur_dtree

32: return dtree_idx[td.get_root().idx]

We describe shortly how we generate dtrees and vtrees from a tree decomposition in such a way that the variables are decided
in order of minimum distance from the root of the tree decomposition. Our strategy only slightly diﬀers from that of Korhonen and
Järvisalo, [47]. Dtrees describe not the order in which variables are processed but the order in which clauses are processed, which
implicitly speciﬁes multiple orders in which the variables can be processed.
The algorithm to generate a dtree from a tree decomposition 𝑡𝑑 for a CNF 𝐶 is given in Algorithm 2. The general idea is that
each clause of 𝐶 has to occur exactly once in the dtree. Then, for a dtree to correspond to a tree decomposition 𝑡𝑑 , we want to ﬁrst
handle all the clauses whose variables occur in the root of 𝑡𝑑 , remove them from the CNF and recurse for each of the children of the
root on the remaining clauses, adding one subdtree for each child. Practically, it is expensive to check for each clause whether it is
contained in the current bag of the tree decomposition. Instead, Algorithm 2 ﬁrst checks (in lines 1-12) for each variable in 𝐶 , which
bag of the tree decomposition is the last in post-order traversal to contain it. This tells us that the index of the last bag in post-order
to contain all the variables of a clause 𝑐 is the minimum index over all variables (line 15). Then, we want to handle clause 𝑐 at this
bag (line 16). Finally, we build the dtree from bottom up by traversing the tree decomposition again in post-order. Here, we ﬁrst
combine the dtrees of the children of the current bag (lines 22-27) before we add the clauses that need to be added at the current
bag (lines 29-33). After processing the current bag, we store the corresponding dtree in a map from bags to dtrees. Then, the ﬁnal
dtree is the one that the root of the tree decomposition maps to.
The algorithm to generate a vtree from a tree decomposition works similarly; the only diﬀerence is that we directly work on
variables instead of clauses.
References
[1] R. Manhaeve, S. Dumancic, A. Kimmig, T. Demeester, L. De Raedt, Neural probabilistic logic programming in deepproblog, Artif. Intell. 298 (2021) 103504,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2021.103504.
51

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

[2] A.N. Fadja, E. Lamma, F. Riguzzi, Deep probabilistic logic programming, in: R. Zese, C.T. Have (Eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Probabilistic Logic
Programming 2017 Co-Located with 27th International Conference on Inductive Logic Programming (ILP 2017), Orléans, France, September 7, 2017, in: CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, CEUR-WS.org, vol. 1916, 2017, pp. 3–14, http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1916/paper1.pdf.
[3] P. Sen, B.W.S.R. de Carvalho, R. Riegel, A.G. Gray, Neuro-symbolic inductive logic programming with logical neural networks, in: Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2022, Thirty-Fourth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IAAI 2022, The Twelveth Symposium on
Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2022 Virtual Event, February 22 - March 1, 2022, AAAI Press, 2022, pp. 8212–8219, https://ojs.aaai.org/
index.php/AAAI/article/view/20795.
[4] M. Klauck, On the connection of probabilistic model checking, planning, and learning for system veriﬁcation, Ph.D. thesis, Saarland University, Saarbrücken,
Germany, 2022, https://publikationen.sulb.uni-saarland.de/handle/20.500.11880/33484.
[5] A. Groß, B. Kracher, J.M. Kraus, S.D. Kühlwein, A.S. Pﬁster, S. Wiese, K. Luckert, O. Pötz, T. Joos, D. Van Daele, et al., Representing dynamic biological
networks with multi-scale probabilistic models, Commun. Biol. 2 (2019) 21.
[6] D.D. Maeyer, B. Weytjens, J. Renkens, L. De Raedt, K. Marchal, Phenetic: network-based interpretation of molecular proﬁling data, Nucleic Acids Res. 43
(2015) W244–W250, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv347.
[7] A. Dries, A. Kimmig, J. Davis, V. Belle, L. De Raedt, Solving probability problems in natural language, in: C. Sierra (Ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2017, Melbourne, Australia, August 19-25, 2017, ijcai.org, 2017, pp. 3981–3987.
[8] C. Baral, M. Gelfond, Logic programming and knowledge representation, J. Log. Program. 19/20 (1994) 73–148, https://doi.org/10.1016/0743-1066(94)
90025-6.
[9] V. Lifschitz, What is answer set programming?, in: D. Fox, C.P. Gomes (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI
2008, Chicago, Illinois, USA, July 13-17, 2008, AAAI Press, 2008, pp. 1594–1597, http://www.aaai.org/Library/AAAI/2008/aaai08-270.php, 2008.
[10] J. Lee, Z. Yang, LPMLN, weak constraints, and P-log, in: S. Singh, S. Markovitch (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
February 4-9, 2017, San Francisco, California, USA, AAAI Press, 2017, pp. 1170–1177, http://aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI17/paper/view/14547.
[11] C. Baral, M. Gelfond, J.N. Rushton, Probabilistic reasoning with answer sets, Theory Pract. Log. Program. 9 (2009) 57–144, https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1471068408003645.
[12] L. De Raedt, A. Kimmig, H. Toivonen, Problog: a probabilistic prolog and its application in link discovery, in: M.M. Veloso (Ed.), IJCAI 2007, Proceedings of
the 20th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Hyderabad, India, January 6-12, 2007, 2007, pp. 2462–2467, http://ijcai.org/Proceedings/
07/Papers/396.pdf.
[13] F. Riguzzi, T. Swift, The PITA system for logical-probabilistic inference, in: S.H. Muggleton, H. Watanabe (Eds.), Latest Advances in Inductive Logic Programming, ILP 2011, Late Breaking Papers, Windsor Great Park, UK, July 31 - August 3, 2011, Imperial College Press / World Scientiﬁc, 2011, pp. 79–86.
[14] J. Vennekens, M. Denecker, M. Bruynooghe, CP-logic: a language of causal probabilistic events and its relation to logic programming, Theory Pract. Log.
Program. 9 (2009) 245–308, https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068409003767.
[15] P. Totis, A. Kimmig, L. De Raedt, Smproblog: stable model semantics in problog and its applications in argumentation, CoRR, arXiv:2110.01990 [abs], 2021,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.01990, arXiv:2110.01990.
[16] M. Nickles, A. Mileo, Web stream reasoning using probabilistic answer set programming, in: R. Kontchakov, M. Mugnier (Eds.), Web Reasoning and Rule
Systems - 8th International Conference, Proceedings, RR 2014, Athens, Greece, September 15-17, 2014, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8741,
Springer, 2014, pp. 197–205.
[17] V.H.N. Rocha, F.G. Cozman, A credal least undeﬁned stable semantics for probabilistic logic programs and probabilistic argumentation, in: G. Kern-Isberner,
G. Lakemeyer, T. Meyer (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, KR 2022, Haifa,
Israel, July 31 - August 5, 2022, 2022, pp. 309–319, https://proceedings.kr.org/2022/31/.
[18] E.M. de Morais, M. Finger, Probabilistic answer set programming, in: Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems, BRACIS 2013, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil, 19-24
October, 2013, IEEE Computer Society, 2013, pp. 150–156.
[19] Z. Yang, A. Ishay, J. Lee, Neurasp: embracing neural networks into answer set programming, in: C. Bessiere (Ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2020, ijcai.org, 2020, pp. 1755–1762.
[20] A. Skryagin, W. Stammer, D. Ochs, D.S. Dhami, K. Kersting, Neural-probabilistic answer set programming, in: G. Kern-Isberner, G. Lakemeyer, T. Meyer (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, KR 2022, Haifa, Israel, July 31 - August 5, 2022,
2022, pp. 463–473, https://proceedings.kr.org/2022/48/.
[21] J.K. Fichte, M. Hecher, M. Morak, S. Woltran, Dynasp2. 5: dynamic programming on tree decompositions in action, in: International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation (IPEC), in: LIPIcs, vol. 89, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017, 17.
[22] M. Jakl, R. Pichler, S. Woltran, Answer-set programming with bounded treewidth, in: C. Boutilier (Ed.), IJCAI 2009, Proceedings of the 21st International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Pasadena, California, USA, July 11-17, 2009, 2009, pp. 816–822, http://ijcai.org/Proceedings/09/Papers/140.pdf.
[23] G. Brewka, J.P. Delgrande, J. Romero, T. Schaub, asprin: customizing answer set preferences without a headache, in: B. Bonet, S. Koenig (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, January 25-30, 2015, Austin, Texas, USA, AAAI Press, 2015, pp. 1467–1474, http://www.aaai.
org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI15/paper/view/9535.
[24] F. Buccafurri, N. Leone, P. Rullo, Strong and weak constraints in disjunctive datalog, in: J. Dix, U. Furbach, A. Nerode (Eds.), Logic Programming and
Nonmonotonic Reasoning, 4th International Conference, Proceedings, LPNMR’97, Dagstuhl Castle, Germany, July 28-31, 1997, in: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 1265, Springer, 1997, pp. 2–17.
[25] G. Van den Broeck, I. Thon, M. van Otterlo, L. De Raedt, DTProbLog: a decision-theoretic probabilistic prolog, in: M. Fox, D. Poole (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, July 11–15, 2010, AAAI Press, 2010, pp. 1217–1222, http://
www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI10/paper/view/1695.
[26] V. Derkinderen, L. De Raedt, Algebraic circuits for decision theoretic inference and learning, in: G.D. Giacomo, A. Catalá, B. Dilkina, M. Milano, S. Barro, A.
Bugarín, J. Lang (Eds.), ECAI 2020 - 24th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 29 August-8 September 2020, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, August
29 - September 8, 2020 - Including 10th Conference on Prestigious Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (PAIS 2020), in: Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Applications, vol. 325, IOS Press, 2020, pp. 2569–2576.
[27] E. Bellodi, M. Alberti, F. Riguzzi, R. Zese, MAP inference for probabilistic logic programming, Theory Pract. Log. Program. 20 (2020) 641–655, https://
doi.org/10.1017/S1471068420000174.
[28] A.L.D. Latour, B. Babaki, A. Dries, A. Kimmig, G. Van den Broeck, S. Nijssen, Combining stochastic constraint optimization and probabilistic programming from knowledge compilation to constraint solving, in: J.C. Beck (Ed.), Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - 23rd International Conference, Proceedings, CP 2017, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, August 28 - September 1, 2017, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10416, Springer, 2017, pp. 495–511.
[29] A. Kimmig, G. Van den Broeck, L. De Raedt, An algebraic prolog for reasoning about possible worlds, in: W. Burgard, D. Roth (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2011, San Francisco, California, USA, August 7-11, 2011, AAAI Press, 2011, pp. 209–214,
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI11/paper/view/3685, 2011.
[30] A. Kimmig, G. Van den Broeck, L. De Raedt, Algebraic model counting, J. Appl. Log. 22 (2017) 46–62, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jal.2016.11.031.
[31] T. Eiter, R. Kiesel, Weighted LARS for quantitative stream reasoning, in: G.D. Giacomo, A. Catalá, B. Dilkina, M. Milano, S. Barro, A. Bugarín, J. Lang (Eds.),
ECAI 2020 - 24th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 29 August-8 September 2020, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, August 29 - September 8, 2020
- Including 10th Conference on Prestigious Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (PAIS 2020), in: Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications, vol. 325,
IOS Press, 2020, pp. 729–736.
52

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

[32] R. Kiesel, P. Totis, A. Kimmig, Eﬃcient knowledge compilation beyond weighted model counting, Theory Pract. Log. Program. 22 (2022) 505–522, https://
doi.org/10.1017/S147106842200014X.
[33] J. Eisner, Parameter estimation for probabilistic ﬁnite-state transducers, in: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Philadelphia, PA, USA, ACL, July 6–12, 2002, 2002, pp. 1–8, https://aclanthology.org/P02-1001/.
[34] T. Eiter, R. Kiesel, On the complexity of sum-of-products problems over semirings, in: Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, ThirtyThird Conference on Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 6304–6311, https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/16783.
[35] D. Fierens, G. Van den Broeck, J. Renkens, D.S. Shterionov, B. Gutmann, I. Thon, G. Janssens, L. De Raedt, Inference and learning in probabilistic logic programs
using weighted Boolean formulas, Theory Pract. Log. Program. 15 (2015) 358–401, https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068414000076.
[36] D. Fierens, G. Van den Broeck, I. Thon, B. Gutmann, L. De Raedt, Inference in probabilistic logic programs using weighted CNF’s, in: Proceedings of the
Twenty-Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2011, pp. 211–220.
[37] J. Lee, S. Talsania, Y. Wang, Computing LPMLN using ASP and MLN solvers, Theory Pract. Log. Program. 17 (2017) 942–960, https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1471068417000400.
[38] S. Hahn, T. Janhunen, R. Kaminski, J. Romero, N. Rühling, T. Schaub, plingo: a system for probabilistic reasoning in clingo based on LPMLN, CoRR, arXiv:
2206.11515 [abs], 2022, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.11515, arXiv:2206.11515.
[39] J. Vlasselaer, G. Van den Broeck, A. Kimmig, W. Meert, L. De Raedt, Tp-compilation for inference in probabilistic logic programs, Int. J. Approx. Reason. 78
(2016) 15–32.
[40] J. Vlasselaer, J. Renkens, G. Van den Broeck, L. De Raedt, Compiling probabilistic logic programs into sentential decision diagrams, in: Proceedings Workshop
on Probabilistic Logic Programming (PLP), 2014, pp. 1–10.
[41] A. Darwiche, P. Marquis, A knowledge compilation map, J. Artif. Intell. Res. 17 (2002) 229–264, https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.989.
[42] S. Mengel, Counting, knowledge compilation and applications, https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-03611336, 2021.
[43] A. Darwiche, SDD: a new canonical representation of propositional knowledge bases, in: T. Walsh (Ed.), IJCAI 2011, Proceedings of the 22nd International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, July 16-22, 2011, IJCAI/AAAI, 2011, pp. 819–826.
[44] F. Somenzi, Cudd: Cu Decision Diagram, Package Release 2.5. 0, University of Colorado at Boulder, 2012.
[45] U. Oztok, A. Darwiche, A top-down compiler for sentential decision diagrams, in: Q. Yang, M.J. Wooldridge (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 25–31, 2015, AAAI Press, 2015, pp. 3141–3148, http://
ijcai.org/Abstract/15/443.
[46] A. Darwiche, New advances in compiling CNF into decomposable negation normal form, in: R.L. de Mántaras, L. Saitta (Eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Eureopean
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ECAI’2004, Including Prestigious Applicants of Intelligent Systems, PAIS 2004, Valencia, Spain, August 22-27, 2004, IOS
Press, 2004, pp. 328–332.
[47] T. Korhonen, M. Järvisalo, Integrating tree decompositions into decision heuristics of propositional model counters (short paper), in: L.D. Michel (Ed.), 27th
International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming, CP 2021, Montpellier, France (Virtual Conference), October 25-29, 2021, in:
LIPIcs, vol. 210, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021, 8.
[48] U. Oztok, A. Darwiche, On compiling CNF into decision-dnnf, in: B. O’Sullivan (Ed.), Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - 20th International
Conference, Proceedings, CP 2014, Lyon, France, September 8-12, 2014, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8656, Springer, 2014, pp. 42–57.
[49] S. Bova, S. Szeider, Circuit treewidth, sentential decision, and query compilation, in: E. Sallinger, J.V. den Bussche, F. Geerts (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, PODS 2017, Chicago, IL, USA, May 14-19, 2017, ACM, 2017, pp. 233–246.
[50] A. Ferrara, G. Pan, M.Y. Vardi, Treewidth in veriﬁcation: local vs. global, in: G. Sutcliﬀe, A. Voronkov (Eds.), Logic for Programming, Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
and Reasoning, 12th International Conference, Proceedings, LPAR 2005, Montego Bay, Jamaica, December 2-6, 2005, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 3835, Springer, 2005, pp. 489–503.
[51] A.K. Jha, D. Suciu, On the tractability of query compilation and bounded treewidth, in: A. Deutsch (Ed.), 15th International Conference on Database Theory,
ICDT ’12, Berlin, Germany, March 26-29, 2012, ACM, 2012, pp. 249–261.
[52] A. Amarilli, F. Capelli, M. Monet, P. Senellart, Connecting knowledge compilation classes and width parameters, Theory Comput. Syst. 64 (2020) 861–914,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00224-019-09930-2.
[53] J. Lagniez, P. Marquis, An improved decision-dnnf compiler, in: C. Sierra (Ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, IJCAI 2017, Melbourne, Australia, August 19-25, 2017, ijcai.org, 2017, pp. 667–673.
[54] F. Fages, Consistency of Clark’s completion and existence of stable models, J. Methods Log. Comput. Sci. 1 (1994) 51–60.
[55] M. Hecher, Treewidth-aware reductions of normal ASP to SAT - is normal ASP harder than SAT after all?, Artif. Intell. 304 (2022) 103651, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.artint.2021.103651.
[56] T. Janhunen, I. Niemelä, Compact translations of non-disjunctive answer set programs to propositional clauses, in: M. Balduccini, T.C. Son (Eds.), Logic
Programming, Knowledge Representation, and Nonmonotonic Reasoning - Essays Dedicated to Michael Gelfond on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday, in:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6565, Springer, 2011, pp. 111–130.
[57] T. Janhunen, Representing normal programs with clauses, in: R.L. de Mántaras, L. Saitta (Eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Eureopean Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, ECAI’2004, Including Prestigious Applicants of Intelligent Systems, PAIS 2004, Valencia, Spain, August 22-27, 2004, IOS Press, 2004, pp. 358–362.
[58] T. Mantadelis, G. Janssens, Dedicated tabling for a probabilistic setting, in: M.V. Hermenegildo, T. Schaub (Eds.), Technical Communications of the 26th
International Conference on Logic Programming, ICLP, 2010, July 16-19, 2010, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, in: LIPIcs, vol. 7, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
für Informatik, 2010, pp. 124–133.
[59] F. Lin, J. Zhao, On tight logic programs and yet another translation from normal logic programs to propositional logic, in: G. Gottlob, T. Walsh (Eds.), IJCAI03, Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Acapulco, Mexico, August 9-15, 2003, Morgan Kaufmann, 2003,
pp. 853–858, http://ijcai.org/Proceedings/03/Papers/123.pdf.
[60] J.K. Fichte, S. Szeider, Backdoors to tractable answer set programming, Artif. Intell. 220 (2015) 64–103, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2014.12.001.
[61] T. Eiter, M. Hecher, R. Kiesel, Treewidth-aware cycle breaking for algebraic answer set counting, in: M. Bienvenu, G. Lakemeyer, E. Erdem (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 18th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, KR 2021, Online Event, November 3-12, 2021, 2021, pp. 269–279.
[62] T. Eiter, M. Hecher, R. Kiesel, aspmc: an algebraic answer set counter, in: J. Arias, F.A. D’Asaro, A. Dyoub, G. Gupta, M. Hecher, E. LeBlanc, R. Peñaloza, E.
Salazar, A. Saptawijaya, F. Weitkämper, J. Zangari (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Logic Programming 2021 Workshops Co-Located with
the 37th International Conference on Logic Programming (ICLP 2021), Porto, Portugal (Virtual) September 20th-21st, 2021, in: CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
CEUR-WS.org, vol. 2970, 2021, https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2970/plppaper1.pdf.
[63] K. Kiljan, M. Pilipczuk, Feedback vertex set experiments, https://github.com/karek/FeedbackVertexSet-Experiments, 2018.
[64] C. Domshlak, J. Hoﬀmann, Probabilistic planning via heuristic forward search and weighted model counting, J. Artif. Intell. Res. 30 (2007), https://doi.org/
10.1613/jair.2289.
[65] C.P. Gomes, A. Sabharwal, B. Selman, Chapter 20: model counting, in: Handbook of Satisﬁability, in: Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications,
vol. 185, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 633–654.
[66] T. Sang, P. Beame, H.A. Kautz, Performing Bayesian inference by weighted model counting, in: M.M. Veloso, S. Kambhampati (Eds.), Proceedings, the Twentieth
National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the Seventeenth Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA,
July 9–13, 2005, AAAI Press / The MIT Press, 2005, pp. 475–482, http://www.aaai.org/Library/AAAI/2005/aaai05-075.php.
53

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

[67] P. Doubilet, G.-C. Rota, R. Stanley, On the foundations of combinatorial theory. VI. The idea of generating function, in: Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical
Statistics and Probability, vol. 2, 1972, pp. 267–318.
[68] J. Lee, Y. Wang, Weight learning in a probabilistic extension of answer set programs, in: 16th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR 2018), AAAI Press, 2018, pp. 22–31, https://aaai.org/ocs/index.php/KR/KR18/paper/view/18057.
[69] L.D. Smet, P.Z.D. Martires, R. Manhaeve, G. Marra, A. Kimmig, L.D. Raedt, Neural probabilistic logic programming in discrete-continuous domains, in: 39th
Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI 2023), in: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, vol. 216, 2023, pp. 529–538.
[70] M. Chavira, A. Darwiche, On probabilistic inference by weighted model counting, Artif. Intell. 172 (2008) 772–799.
[71] W. Faber, G. Pfeifer, N. Leone, Semantics and complexity of recursive aggregates in answer set programming, Artif. Intell. 175 (2011) 278–298, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2010.04.002.
[72] M. Gelfond, V. Lifschitz, The stable model semantics for logic programming, in: R.A. Kowalski, K.A. Bowen (Eds.), Logic Programming, Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference and Symposium (2 Volumes), Seattle, Washington, USA, August 15-19, 1988, MIT Press, 1988, pp. 1070–1080.
[73] H.L. Bodlaender, A partial k-arboretum of graphs with bounded treewidth, Theor. Comput. Sci. 209 (1998) 1–45.
[74] M. Droste, P. Gastin, Weighted automata and weighted logics, Theor. Comput. Sci. 380 (2007) 69–86, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2007.02.055.
[75] V. Belle, L. De Raedt, Semiring programming: a semantic framework for generalized sum product problems, Int. J. Approx. Reason. 126 (2020) 181–201,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijar.2020.08.001.
[76] S. Bistarelli, U. Montanari, F. Rossi, T. Schiex, G. Verfaillie, H. Fargier, Semiring-based csps and valued csps: frameworks, properties, and comparison, Constraints 4 (1999) 199–240, https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026441215081.
[77] T.J. Green, G. Karvounarakis, V. Tannen, Provenance semirings, in: L. Libkin (Ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium
on Principles of Database Systems, Beijing, China, ACM, June 11–13, 2007, 2007, pp. 31–40.
[78] F. Bacchus, J. Berg, M. Järvisalo, R. Martins (Eds.), MaxSAT Evaluation 2020: Solver and Benchmark Descriptions, Department of Computer Science Report
Series B, vol. B-2020–2, Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland, 2020.
[79] M. Gebser, R. Kaminski, B. Kaufmann, T. Schaub, Clingo = ASP + control: preliminary report, CoRR, arXiv:1405.3694 [abs], 2014, http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.
3694, arXiv:1405.3694.
[80] U. Oztok, A. Choi, A. Darwiche, Solving pppp -complete problems using knowledge compilation, in: C. Baral, J.P. Delgrande, F. Wolter (Eds.), Principles of
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference, KR 2016, Cape Town, South Africa, April 25-29, 2016, AAAI
Press, 2016, pp. 94–103, http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/KR/KR16/paper/view/12910.
[81] D. Azzolini, F. Riguzzi, Inference in probabilistic answer set programming under the credal semantics, in: R. Basili, D. Lembo, C. Limongelli, A. Orlandini (Eds.),
AIxIA 2023 - Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence - XXIInd International Conference of the Italian Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Proceedings, AIxIA 2023,
Rome, Italy, November 6-9, 2023, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14318, Springer, 2023, pp. 367–380.
[82] T. Sato, A statistical learning method for logic programs with distribution semantics, in: L. Sterling (Ed.), Logic Programming, Proceedings of the Twelfth
International Conference on Logic Programming, Tokyo, Japan, June 13–16, 1995, MIT Press, 1995, pp. 715–729.
[83] F. Riguzzi, T. Swift, A survey of probabilistic logic programming, in: M. Kifer, Y.A. Liu (Eds.), Declarative Logic Programming: Theory, Systems, and Applications, ACM / Morgan & Claypool, 2018, pp. 185–228.
[84] R. Kiesel, T. Eiter, Knowledge compilation and more with sharpsat-td, in: P. Marquis, T.C. Son, G. Kern-Isberner (Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, KR 2023, Rhodes, Greece, September 2-8, 2023, 2023, pp. 406–416.
[85] D.S. Shterionov, J. Renkens, J. Vlasselaer, A. Kimmig, W. Meert, G. Janssens, The most probable explanation for probabilistic logic programs with annotated
disjunctions, in: J. Davis, J. Ramon (Eds.), Inductive Logic Programming - 24th International Conference, ILP 2014, Nancy, France, September 14-16, 2014,
Revised Selected Papers, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9046, Springer, 2014, pp. 139–153.
[86] E. Tsamoura, V. Gutiérrez-Basulto, A. Kimmig, Beyond the grounding bottleneck: datalog techniques for inference in probabilistic logic programs, in: The
Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI
2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020, AAAI Press, 2020,
pp. 10284–10291, https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6591, 2020.
[87] F. Bancilhon, D. Maier, Y. Sagiv, J. Ullman, Magic sets and other strange ways to implement logic programs, in: Proceedings of the acm Symposium on
Principles of Database Systems, Cambridge, Massachusetts, March 1986, pp. 24–26.
[88] D. Shterionov, Design and Development of Probabilistic Inference Pipelines, Ph.D. thesis, KU Leuven, 2015.
[89] R.A. Aziz, G. Chu, C.J. Muise, P.J. Stuckey, Stable model counting and its application in probabilistic logic programming, in: B. Bonet, S. Koenig (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, January 25-30, 2015, Austin, Texas, USA, AAAI Press, 2015, pp. 3468–3474,
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI15/paper/view/9709.
[90] F. Lin, Y. Zhao, ASSAT: computing answer sets of a logic program by SAT solvers, Artif. Intell. 157 (2004) 115–137, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2004.04.
004.
[91] V. Lifschitz, A.A. Razborov, Why are there so many loop formulas?, ACM Trans. Comput. Log. 7 (2006) 261–268, https://doi.org/10.1145/1131313.1131316.
[92] M. Gebser, J. Lee, Y. Lierler, On elementary loops of logic programs, Theory Pract. Log. Program. 11 (2011) 953–988, https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1471068411000019.
[93] E. Giunchiglia, Y. Lierler, M. Maratea, Answer set programming based on propositional satisﬁability, J. Autom. Reason. 36 (2006) 345–377, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10817-006-9033-2.
[94] A.M.C.A. Koster, H.L. Bodlaender, S.P.M. van Hoesel, Treewidth: computational experiments, Electron. Notes Discrete Math. 8 (2001) 54–57, https://doi.org/
10.1016/S1571-0653(05)80078-2.
[95] I. Niemelä, Stable models and diﬀerence logic, Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 53 (2008) 313–329, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10472-009-9118-9.
[96] M. Björk, Successful SAT encoding techniques, J. Satisf. Boolean Model. Comput. 7 (2011) 189–201, https://doi.org/10.3233/sat190085.
[97] M.H. van Emden, R.A. Kowalski, The semantics of predicate logic as a programming language, J. ACM 23 (1976) 733–742, https://doi.org/10.1145/321978.
321991.
[98] J. Guo, F. Hüﬀner, R. Niedermeier, A structural view on parameterizing problems: distance from triviality, in: R.G. Downey, M.R. Fellows, F.K.H.A. Dehne
(Eds.), Parameterized and Exact Computation, First International Workshop, Proceedings, IWPEC 2004, Bergen, Norway, September 14-17, 2004, in: Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3162, Springer, 2004, pp. 162–173.
[99] Lark, Lark - a parsing toolkit for python, https://github.com/lark-parser/lark, 2017.
[100] L. De Raedt, A. Kimmig, Probabilistic (logic) programming concepts, Mach. Learn. 100 (2015) 5–47, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-015-5494-z.
[101] lp2lp, Asp tools, https://research.ics.aalto.ﬁ/software/asp/lp2sat/, 2006.
[102] H. Dell, T. Husfeldt, B.M.P. Jansen, P. Kaski, C. Komusiewicz, F.A. Rosamond, The ﬁrst parameterized algorithms and computational experiments challenge,
in: J. Guo, D. Hermelin (Eds.), 11th International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation, IPEC 2016, Aarhus, Denmark, August 24–26, 2016,
in: LIPIcs, vol. 63, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016, 30.
[103] K. Kiljan, M. Pilipczuk, Experimental evaluation of parameterized algorithms for feedback vertex set, in: G. D’Angelo (Ed.), 17th International Symposium on
Experimental Algorithms, SEA 2018, L’Aquila, Italy, June 27–29, 2018, in: LIPIcs, vol. 103, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018, 12.
[104] M. Hamann, B. Strasser, Graph bisection with Pareto optimization, ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics 23 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1145/3173045.
[105] H. Tamaki, Positive-instance driven dynamic programming for treewidth, J. Comb. Optim. 37 (2019) 1283–1311, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10878-018-0353-z.
54

Artificial Intelligence 330 (2024) 104109

T. Eiter, M. Hecher and R. Kiesel

[106] M. Abseher, N. Musliu, S. Woltran, htd – a free, open-source framework for (customized) tree decompositions and beyond, in: D. Salvagnin, M. Lombardi (Eds.),
Integration of AI and OR Techniques in Constraint Programming - 14th International Conference, Proceedings, CPAIOR 2017, Padua, Italy, June 5-8, 2017, in:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10335, Springer, 2017, pp. 376–386.
[107] B. Strasser, Computing tree decompositions with ﬂowcutter: PACE 2017 submission, CoRR, arXiv:1709.08949 [abs], 2017, http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.08949,
arXiv:1709.08949.
[108] J. Lind-Nielsen, Buddy: a binary decision diagram package, http://sourceforge.net/projects/buddy/, 1999.
[109] C.J. Muise, S.A. McIlraith, J.C. Beck, E.I. Hsu Dsharp, Fast d-dnnf compilation with sharpsat, in: L. Kosseim, D. Inkpen (Eds.), Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
- 25th Canadian Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Proceedings, Canadian AI 2012, Toronto, ON, Canada, May 28-30, 2012, in: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 7310, Springer, 2012, pp. 356–361.
[110] J.K. Fichte, M. Hecher, F. Hamiti, The model counting competition 2020, ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics 26 (2021) 13, https://doi.org/10.1145/3459080.
[111] J.K. Fichte, M. Hecher, Model counting competition 2021, https://mccompetition.org, 2021.
[112] R. Albert, A. Barabási, Statistical mechanics of complex networks, CoRR, arXiv:cond-mat/0106096, 2001, http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0106096.
[113] W. Meert, Pysdd: python package for sentential decision diagrams (sdd), https://github.com/wannesm/PySDD, 2018.
[114] A. Darwiche, P. Marquis, D. Suciu, S. Szeider, PySDD, in: Recent Trends in Knowledge Compilation, Dagstuhl Seminar 17381, Dagstuhl Rep. 7 (9) (2017)
81–82, https://doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.7.9.62.
[115] J. Lagniez, P. Marquis, Preprocessing for propositional model counting, in: C.E. Brodley, P. Stone (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, July 27 -31, 2014, Québec City, Québec, Canada, AAAI Press, 2014, pp. 2688–2694, http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/
AAAI14/paper/view/8264.
[116] F. Slivovsky, S. Szeider, A faster algorithm for propositional model counting parameterized by incidence treewidth, in: L. Pulina, M. Seidl (Eds.), Theory and
Applications of Satisﬁability Testing - SAT 2020 - 23rd International Conference, Proceedings, Alghero, Italy, July 3-10, 2020, in: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 12178, Springer, 2020, pp. 267–276.
[117] M. Alviano, W. Faber, Aggregates in answer set programming, Künstl. Intell. 32 (2018) 119–124, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218-018-0545-9.
[118] T. Janhunen, Cross-translating answer set programs using the ASPTOOLS collection, Künstl. Intell. 32 (2018) 183–184, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218-0180529-9.
[119] J. Bomanson, M. Gebser, T. Janhunen, Improving the normalization of weight rules in answer set programs, in: E. Fermé, J. Leite (Eds.), Logics in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence - 14th European Conference, Proceedings, JELIA 2014, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, September 24-26, 2014, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 8761, Springer, 2014, pp. 166–180.
[120] V. Derkinderen, P.Z.D. Martires, S. Kolb, P. Morettin, Top-down knowledge compilation for counting modulo theories, CoRR, arXiv:2306.04541 [abs], 2023,
10.48550/arXiv.2306.04541, arXiv:2306.04541.
[121] T. Kloks Treewidth, Computations and Approximations, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 842, Springer, 1994.
[122] S.B. Akers, Binary decision diagrams, IEEE Trans. Comput. 27 (1978) 509–516.
[123] E. Korach, N. Solel, Tree-width, path-width, and cutwidth, Discrete Appl. Math. 43 (1993) 97–101.

55

